1. Jesus be with you, my daughter. I wanted to be in a more restful state when writing to you. For all that I have just read and written amazes me in that I was able to do it, and so I've decided to be brief. Please God I can be.
2. With regard to my going to Valladolid, were they in their right minds when they thought I could make the choice rather than go where I was sent? Our padre spoke of Valladolid for reasons that no longer exist, and I don't believe he ever had the intention that I go there permanently; but yes, it was my desire. The nuncio has already written to me to say that I should continue making foundations as before. Our padre must have so explained matters that the two came to agree. From the time the nuncio was informed, he has been of this mind. I am determined not to make any foundations unless given orders ... now is the time when our padre will begin the visitation of the friars, for he still has not begun.
3. My brothers are causing a stir so that I might return with them, especially Lorenzo. He says he will wait here until my orders come, for he thinks our padre is softening in his resistance. I only remain silent and ask the Lord to inspire his heart with that which will best fit God's plan and by which I will please the Lord the most, for this is what will make me happy. And do the same up there, I beg you. Tell this to my daughters, and may God reward them for their joy; but let them believe me and never look for happiness in things that are passing, for they will be disappointed, and tell my Casilda the same since I am not able to write to her.
4. In a letter by way of Medina that the prioress will have sent you, I mentioned that I received your letters with the money for portage. Now don't send any more portage until I tell you. With regard to Agustina, do what you have done up until now ... it is very small and when one subtracts the dowry that was given and the cost of food, it is nothing. And so her mother has written me again to assure me that the reason does not lie in this but in the desire of her daughter. I also respect this desire, and perhaps it is the true motive. If it is of God, he will enlighten us.
5. I don't know how I've left to the last speaking about my distress over the illness of mi padre. I'm afraid he did one of those penances customary during Advent, such as sleeping on the floor, for he doesn't usually suffer this illness. Make him keep his feet well covered. Indeed, this pain is not hard to put up with! Once it takes hold, it's a wretched thing and lasts for so many days. Make sure he is dressing warmly enough. Blessed be God that he is doing better. There is nothing that so stirs me to pity as this kind of severe pain, even when in my enemies ... Give him my regards and very best wishes.
6. The page is very young if he is no more than eleven years old. If he were twelve, it would be better. I would like him to know how to write before coming here, for he will have to accompany the boys to school at San Gil in Avila and begin his studies. My brother said that since this was an initiative of Padre Fray Domingo's he would accept the page even if there is no need, for I told him how indebted I am to mi padre ...
7. I would very much like to accept the lay sister for that monastery, but I don't see how. For the good Asensio has asked us to accept one of his servants, and I have to take a lay sister away from Medina so that this servant may live there. The aspirant is as holy as Estefanía and still hasn't received the habit; on the other hand, ask Alberta. If you would accept this saint there, you would be making me happy. I would bet that if Señora Doña María knew her, she would ask me for her. You could accept her in place of Doña Mariana, and I could ask our padre to find a place for the latter.
8. It's strange that you have not told me what he himself said, perhaps because he doesn't know where he will be sent. I was waiting to see how ... Do all you can to learn about her qualities. If she is good, even though we may not know where to place her, we should accept her. Here we are lacking one, and I would love to have one come from Castile. But it is so far away that I don't see how this could be done. You should know that our padre has many sisters, and they are very poor; and since the Blessed Virgin took him away from his parents whom he was supporting, it's necessary that we help them.
