1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. Oh, God help me, how apt is your temperament to lead me into temptation. I tell you my virtue has to be great in order to write you this letter. And what is worse, I fear that something of your temperament will stick to mi padre, Licentiate Padilla -- may God forgive you both -- since he does not write to me or even send regards, although I am so indebted to Licentiate Padilla that however neglectful he is I cannot neglect him. So I ask you to consider this letter as meant also for him.
2. When I consider the embroilment you left me with and how unaware you are of everything, I don't know what to think except accursed be the man, et cetera. But since evil is to be repaid with good, I wanted to write this so that you will know that on the feast of St. James we will take possession of the house. And the friars have been as silent as the dead. Our padre spoke to Navarro, and he is the one who I think made them keep quiet.
3. The house is such that the sisters never cease thanking God. May he be blessed for everything. All say that what we paid was nothing and are certain that today it would cost 20,000 ducats to build. They say the site is one of the good ones in Seville. The good prior of las Cuevas came here twice -- he is delighted with the house -- and Fray Bartolomé de Aguilar came once before leaving, for I already wrote you that he was going to the chapter. It has been a great blessing that we happened to stumble upon this house, although because of the excise we got into some serious conflict. Well, I think we are going to have to pay everything. My brother had to give us a loan and he is watching over the renovation work, which relieves me of a great burden. The notary was the one who made the mistake in regard to the excise. Our padre is delighted with the house and so is everyone else. Padre Soto has serious statements to make -- he was just here -- and says that since you don't write to me, he will not write to you. The church will be set up in the entrance way; it will look very nice. Everything is turning out perfectly. All of this is in regard to the house.
4. With regard to Tostado, a friar has now come who left him in Barcelona in March. This friar carries a patent letter (for he was a conventual here), which Tostado signs as vicar general for all Spain. Cota came yesterday. He is hidden in Don Jerónimo's house, hoping that Fray Agustín Juárez will come today, according to what they say. The first two things are true, for I saw the patent letter and know that the other person is here. The information about the provincial is certain, and they say he is coming to take up his office and bringing with him a Motu from the pope which, according to what they say, leaves nothing more to be desired as far as the proposal of the calced friars goes. The prior, also, told me today that one among them in whom he has confidence assured him this was so.
5. His most illustrious lordship our archbishop, his assistant, and his public attorney are of the opinion that our padre should hide from them so that he cannot be notified of anything until the orders of the most illustrious nuncio are known, and this for many reasons they consider valid. So he is going to Castile without continuing the visitation and by a different route. This is not the time to be making visitations, for they are very agitated. May God forgive the one who cuts short so much good, although I certainly believe this is part of God's design for the sake of greater good. May it please His Majesty that they merit to make amends. As for the discalced friars, I have no doubt that they will make much progress in perfection, certain that the Lord disposes all for their greater good. Our padre appointed Evangelista, who is the prior of the Carmelite community, vicar provincial. He is now waiting for this blow. I am telling him, however, that since he is not the head, they will not notify him of anything. He has courage, and his assistant is well disposed to help him if something should happen.
6. Tomorrow the prior and the subprior of Los Remedios are going to Umbrete, for the archbishop who is there sent for them. If those two do not carry documents that would annul what the visitator has done -- and I don't think they do -- much will already be done. May the Lord direct all for his service, and may he free you from the siren's song, and also mi padre, Licentiate Padilla, whose hands my brother kisses many times and those of your reverence. I would love, infinitely, to have you here, for I believe you would be delighted to see how well things have turned out.
7. We came three days before the lieutenant left. We became great friends with him and his wife. They all gave us plenty to eat and showed us much kindness. The lieutenant says there is no better house in Seville nor a better site. I don't think one will suffer from the heat in it. The patio looks like it was made of alcorza. Now everyone enters through it -- because Mass is being said in a room until the church is constructed -- and they see the whole house. Off the inner patio there are nice rooms; we are better-off there than in the other house. The garden is delightful, the views magnificent. It cost us a lot of trouble, but I consider it all worthwhile because I would never have imagined it would be this good. Mother Prioress and all the sisters commend themselves to your prayers and those of my Padre Padilla; as I do to those of Father Provincial, Fray Angel. It amazes me how quickly the latter arrived in Madrid. May it please God that the chapter will result in his service, and it will if it is carried out as you say. May God watch over you despite all your faults and make you very holy. I had not thought the house was such a good one.
Today is 9 May.
8. Would you keep me informed about what is happening, for our padre is not here and I have no way of finding out about anything. I wouldn't want you to leave there without learning how all this ends. I tell you that I miss you, for you understand our affairs, and we are now proceeding with care and caution. My regards to Padre Fray Vicente and congratulations to him for his profession.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
9. Oh, the lies that circulate down here! It's enough to make you faint. Now they just told me that the visitator for the friars of the cloth is in Carmona -- that's how they refer to him -- and that in many monasteries they have given him their obedience. Nonetheless, I fear these things from Rome, for I remember the past, even though I do not think they will be to our harm but to our advantage. Those calced friars must have something up their sleeve. They wouldn't be so foolish as to come here, for they still don't know that our padre has departed; they think he is here. We are receiving many compliments and the neighbors are jubilant. I would like to see our discalced affairs brought to a conclusion, for after all the Lord won't put up with those other friars much longer; so many misfortunes will have to have an ending.
