1. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. I am delighted that today a muleteer is available; it puts me at ease to know that I can write to you through so trustworthy a person. I tell you that the thought of your being back in Seville already and that they made you hasten your return fills me with anxiety. I see that the best way I could lessen my anxiety would be to be present there. When I consider that only now and then I will have news about you, I don't know how I will bear it. May God provide a remedy and grant me the great favor of seeing you free of those people.
2. I don't know why they want to inflict penalties on you and all the others when the excommunications of Padre Mariano and Father Prior were enough. I have no other relief than to see that you have Doctor Arganda. Give him my best regards. I would love to see him again. Don't forget to tell him that I beg him not to be so confident that those people will give up seeking their freedom; they will seek it even at the cost of lives, for they say they will have to do this if you return. Even if they don't go that far, it is always good to take precautions against what could come about, since you are dealing with fiery people.
3. You should know, mi padre, that you made me very happy on the day I saw you, but I would never regret your not having been present for the foolishness that went on there; for they couldn't have done otherwise had you been there, and all to the detriment of the authority of your office and person.
4. I long to know if you are well after having returned from so long a journey. For love of our Lord, try to write to me as soon as you can and find some way for sending the letters. This will be another trial, that Avila is so disorganized as to make it difficult to receive news about you, save from time to time. The letters must go by way of Madrid or Segovia, or sometimes by Toledo. Look at the roundabout ways we have to resort to and in the circumstances we now find ourselves, for even a few hours without knowing about you seemed to be a long time. Since you know this, it would be a great cruelty for you to neglect writing; and even if you cannot write at length, at least let me know about your health. May our Lord give you the good health needed for the sake of the order.
5. Let me know how things are going and if you were happy to see that the house of St. Joseph's is so perfect and has become so well known because of the festivity with which it was inaugurated. I at once saw that since it would be a restful place to live in, the Lord would not leave me there. May he be blessed forever. Here the setup of the house is bad, and because I've just come from the other one, it has seemed worse.
6. Mother Prioress is better, although not completely well. Her illness grieves me, and it would so even more if there were no hope of her getting better, for it is a dangerous illness. We would lose the best member the order has. From what she says, she has made amends for the faults that she used to have, and she will do nothing without reflection. I love her a great deal and am obligated to love her more at seeing how much she loves you and the concern she has for your health. Don't forget to pray much for her. This house, so to speak, would be lost without her.
7. I sent a messenger at once to Doña Luisa. I am waiting for her and have determined that if she does not do things well, I will arrange to have the nuns transfer to her house in Paracuellos until one is constructed here. Paracuellos is three leagues from Madrid and two from Alcalá and, as it seems to me, a very healthy place to live, for I very much wanted her to build the monastery there, but she never wanted to. I would much rather that the nuns not have to leave since they have already settled in this place and it is a place of transit. But if nothing else can be done, please God she will acquiesce and that you will approve. I will not await further authorization from you, for I believe we have it and there is no other remedy. To close the monastery as was done in Pastrana would be out of the question. Well, if she doesn't answer favorably now, I will go to Toledo to get some other persons to speak to her. I will not leave there until in one way or another this is all settled. Don't let yourself become troubled about it all.
8. I arrived in good condition. We did the right thing in deciding to come the way we did rather than in covered wagons, for I could choose the time for traveling, and my brother provided me with every comfort. He kisses your hands very much. He arrived in good health and remains so. He's a wonderful man! Would that he would leave me in Toledo and go away until matters in Andalusia are settled! He would also have news from you more often, but there is no way of convincing him. Teresa came with us entertaining us along the way, and never being a burden.
9. Oh, mi padre, what a terrible thing happened to me! While we were sitting on a haystack considering ourselves lucky to have found it, next to an inn that we were unable to enter, a large salamander or lizard got in between my tunic and bare arm, and it was the mercy of God that it didn't get in somewhere else, for I think I would have died, judging from what I felt. But my brother got hold of it at once and when he threw it away, it hit Antonio Ruiz right in the mouth. The latter was most helpful along the way, and Diego also. For that, please give him the habit right away, for he is a little angel. I think he brought us a new nun whom I much prefer to Catalina whom I must bring from here. It seems she is doing better, but her anxiety to leave will ruin her health completely. You can rest assured that she was sick when she performed the good work. She says she did it to bring more honor to the order.
10. Mother Prioress sends you her best regards. She says she doesn't write you so as not to tire you. She's up and about and since she is so fond of taking care of everything and so meticulous, her return to health will be slower. When you go to our house, pay special attention to San Gabriel for me, for she was much afflicted when I left; she is an angel in her simplicity and has a very good spirit -- I owe her much.
11. You ought to give orders that the nuns should in no way offer anyone something to eat in the parlor, for this becomes a great disturbance for them. And except for you (for you are not to be included in such considerations, when there is a need), they should do so only reluctantly. I consider it worse when they do so, and this I have stated, and there are many disadvantages in their so doing. And the fact that they wouldn't have food for themselves if they did is reason enough, for the alms are few and the nuns won't say anything but go themselves without eating; and this is the least of the disadvantages. When I was there, I saw to it that they would not be in want and that they would not use up what belonged to the monastery. Things tend to go on as in the beginning, and from such a beginning would come much harm. So, you should realize that this is very important and that it will give the nuns great consolation to know that you want them to observe the ordinances given and confirmed by Pedro Hernández{Fernández}. They are all young, and believe me, mi padre, that it is safer for them not to have dealings with the friars. I do not fear anything else in these monasteries more than that. For although now everything is holy, I know where it will all end up if this isn't ruled out from the start. And that is why I insist so much upon it. Pardon me, mi padre, and remain with God. May His Majesty watch over you for me and give me patience to endure the long time I must wait before receiving a letter from you.
12. I arrived on the second day after Pentecost; today is the following Friday. I came by way of Almodóvar. Fray Ambrosio had a big celebration for me. I am crushed over the departure of Padre Fray Baltasar for Toledo. I don't know why Padre Mariano exposes him to temptation, for even at a distance the occasions are not lacking. Please God ...
13. I got this far when the response of Doña Luisa arrived. She says she will send a very good worker this week. I am disaapointed. I forgot to tell you that in Seville Padre Fray Alonso, the subprior, troubled by the harm that it does him to stay in that house, has asked you to send him elsewhere. He is a good man; the right thing to do is give him relief. He would get on well in Almodóvar, I believe, for they have enough to eat; and since the prior is not there, it would be good to have a vicar. Fray Gregorio could take his place, and everything, I think, would proceed well. The more I speak to this padre, the more impressed I am. You will see for yourself.
14. What I ask you is that you take care of yourself. I wouldn't want you to be so negligent about yourself that everything ends in ruins. I know that Mother Prioress will take care of your needs. I will provide from up here, nor will I lack the means. I tell you this so that when you need something you will ask the prioress, for she will send you money shortly and whatever you need. I don't know how many reales I left with San Gabriel; it was what I had left, which wasn't much. Take note, I wouldn't want to say anything to the other friars, which shouldn't surprise you, for it is evident that you need money, and I am worried about your being down there during the summer. This diligence to provide for you from up here does not mean that down there the prioress and subprioress and all the nuns don't care. But perhaps they will be receiving few alms, and when you see this, you will be very reluctant to accept anything.
15. Please God you are well, and may he watch over you for us. The time of your absence will pass, although badly.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and subject, 
Teresa of Jesus
