	1. I wouldn't want your honor to forget this, and so I am putting it down here. I have a great fear that if you do not start now to take much care about the education of these boys, they will soon be mixing with some of the haughty crowd in Avila. It's necessary that you make them go at once to the Society, for I am writing about it to the rector as you will see. And if it seems appropriate to the good Francisco de Salcedo and to Maestro Daza, they should wear the student's biretta. Rodrigo's daughter had six children of which only one was a boy. Fortunately for the latter they always insisted on his studies, and even now he is at Salamanca. And this is true also of Don Diego de Aguila's son. Anyway, you will find out there what may be the suitable thing to do. Please God, my brothers will not allow their sons to become vain.
2. You will not be able to see much of Francisco de Salcedo or of the Maestro unless you go to their houses, for they live far from Perálvarez, and it is good to have these talks while alone. For now, don't forget that you are not to have a designated confessor or any more than the smallest number of house servants. It's better to have to increase the number in the future than to have to reduce it. I am now going to write to Valladolid to have them send the page. Even if the boys have to go for a while without him, it doesn't matter; for there are two of them and they can go together; I'm now writing for the page to come.
3. You are inclined and accustomed to receiving much honor. You need to mortify yourself in this respect and not listen to everybody, but follow the opinion of these two in all matters, and also of Padre Muñoz of the Society, if you think. But the opinions of the two former are enough for more serious matters and you can adhere to their views. Be careful -- sometimes we may start things that can be harmful in ways not immediately obvious. You can gain more favor from God, and even the world, by saving your money so as to give alms, and your sons will also benefit from this. For the present, I wouldn't want you to buy a mule, but an old saddle pony should be sufficient for your travels and domestic chores. There's no reason why those boys can't go around on foot. Make them study.
