1. ... Now I want to tell your paternity something, because the messenger is a person I can trust. You already know how Angela took for her confessor the prior of La Sisla, for she believes that in many matters one cannot be without someone to consult. She wouldn't feel sure she was doing right nor would she be at peace. The said person began to see her often, but afterward he almost never came. The prioress and I could not discover the reason for this. Once while the unhappy Angela was speaking to Joseph, He told her that He was the one who held him back, that Doctor Velázquez was better for her since he was learned in canon law and highly educated and that in this way she would find some relief, that He would move him to listen to her and understand (for he hesitated since he is very busy). And since Joseph is so serious a person as you well know, and he counseled her in similar ways before, she didn't know what to do, having already begun with someone else to whom she owed so much. On the other hand she feared displeasing Joseph.
2. She remained thus undecided for several days, and it was a trial for her not to be able to get your opinion, fearing she might lose her peace by consulting with so many. Padre Salazar then came and she decided to do whatever he might say however much the change would cost her, and she almost complained to Joseph for not having informed her earlier. She told Padre Salazar about everything that was happening. He had been the one who had previously counseled her about the prior of La Sisla. She can discuss everything with Padre Salazar, as you are aware, because he already knows about it all. He told her to do what Joseph said. And this was done, and what Joseph said is being realized. First, that the prior came here and that when the prioress asked him why he was acting in this way, he answered that he did not know, that there was nothing he desired more than to come and that he saw clearly that afterward he would regret not coming. He was not master of himself in this regard nor could he do anything else and he was astonished at his powerlessness.
3. Second, that hardly was it mentioned one day to the other person when he said that no matter how busy he was, he would come every week, and was as happy as if he had been offered the archbishopric of Toledo (although I don't think he would be so happy over the latter since he is so good). Fray Hernando de Medina will tell you about him; don't forget to ask him. That you may see how he is accepting the task, I am sending you this note, for I had contacted him over some doubts I had, which I will not mention since it would take too long; they did not concern prayer.
4. So it is, mi padre, that Angela is very happy to have him as her confessor, so much the more since after having met Paul, her soul was unable to find comfort or happiness with anyone. Now, although not as much as with Paul, she feels settled and satisfied, and her soul is disposed to obey him. It is the greatest relief for her. For accustomed all her life to obeying, and being without Paul, nothing she did satisfied her, nor did she think she was doing right; and even if she wanted to she was not able to submit to another. Believe me, he who was at work in the first instance was so also in the second. For she is as amazed by this new condition as was the prior at feeling himself prevented from doing what he wanted.
5. I tell you that you can rejoice if you desire to give some comfort to Angela. It's enough that she is not as happy as with Paul, for her soul has no other comfort. He was not ignorant of the friendship Joseph had with her, for he had heard a great deal, nor was he surprised. Since he is so learned, he backs everything up with sacred scripture. This affords the poor soul the greatest comfort, for in all ways God has banished from her everything she loves. May he be blessed forever.
6. What we must be careful about now is to prevent the prior from finding out. We can let him think that because of his delays about coming I also at times confess with the other person and that you have informed me that I should do what I am told as though it were being told to me by you for the good of my soul. For I assure you that the desires and impulses this woman has to do something for God are so great that now that she cannot do great works, she needs to find out how she can please God more in what she can do.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
