For Mother Prioress of St. Joseph's in Seville, my daughter.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. I have been feeling very distressed over your illness. I don't know what to do to keep from feeling it so deeply when a prioress in one of our houses becomes sick. The prioress in Malagón is getting better, glory to God. Take care of yourself, and whatever you do, avoid the sarsaparilla water. And for the love of God, don't let the fever go without taking some remedy for it, something other than purgatives. I have found some comfort in remembering that sometimes they thought you had the fever but I could see that you did not. May God preserve you for me and give you the good health I ask of him, amen.
2. The packages arrived in good condition and that will always be so with Figueredo's services. The cost of the postage will be safe; you can write on the outside the amount that is enclosed -- and don't forget to enclose it. You must tell me how my letters reach you, for I doubt if the ones I sent with Figueredo have arrived there yet. Here they are not in any danger, for he has been alerted to the situation and is a very good man. And although you have responded to some of my letters, I don't remember with whom I sent them. May God watch over you, for you are doing things very well. But it isn't necessary for you to enclose my letters with your responses; I think that would prove tiresome.
3. Oh, how I envy your hearing those sermons, and how I long to be with all of you. Here they say that I love the nuns in the Seville house more than all the others. Certainly, I don't know why, but I do love them dearly. So, I am not surprised by your affection for me, for I have always felt the same way toward you, but it pleases me to hear this. There is no longer any reason to speak of what happened in the past, for I certainly don't believe you were responsible for it. I like your courage, and so I believe God will help you. May he be pleased to grant you health as I beseech him.
4. I was delighted to hear of the clothing and the profession; give them my congratulations, and tell San Francisco her letters are a joy to me, as are those of the other nuns, and ask their pardon for my not answering. The amount of correspondence I had down there was nothing; since I've come up here, it has gotten to be terrible.
5. In regard to Garciálvarez's relatives do what you think best, for he will speak the truth, and anyone from his family could not be bad. If I have time I will write to ask him not to stop hearing the nuns' confessions, for that is something I regret; if I don't write, tell him for me. I am very sorry about the illness of our good Father Prior. We are praying for him. I am afraid the courier is ready to leave, so I am not writing him. You will lose a lot if you lose him, but God, who lives forever, will be with you.
6. Regarding the prayer of those sisters, I am writing to our padre; he will speak to you about it. When San Jerónimo experiences something, write to me. By no means speak to Rodrigo about it; with Acosta, you can. Give him my best regards, for I get along very well with him, and we owe him much.
7. I was delighted about the settlement over the excise. My brother has purchased an exempt estate at La Serna, near Avila. It is a very nice piece of property, with pasture lands, grain fields, and woods. It cost 14,000 ducats. Since he didn't have that amount then -- far from it -- this would be the time for you to reimburse a third of what you owe him, and not fail to do so on account of your need of money for food. I hope in God that you will be able to manage without it. If little by little you can collect what the people in the house owe you, that will be great.
8. You don't mention the deputy's daughter; my regards to her and all her sisters, and anyone else you see, and to Delgado and Blas, and remain with God. Send my regards to Fray Gregorio and tell him to keep me always informed about his health. And may God give you back your health, for I liked your work. Nonetheless, you shouldn't try to spin when you have a fever; otherwise it will never leave you, considering how much you move your arm when you spin and how much you spin. Regards to Margarita.
9. If you must have a lay sister, keep in mind that a relative of our padre's is agitating to enter; let me know if you can take her. The prioress in Valladolid  has seen her. She says she would be a good lay sister. She probably does not know how to read. Our padre doesn't want to become involved in the matter. His little sister is someone special and of a gentler disposition than Teresa; she has unusual ability. I am delighted with her.
Today is 13 October.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
