1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. It's quite clear that you have not understood all that I owe to Padre Olea and how much I care for him, for you have written me about matters that he has discussed, or is discussing, with me. I believe you now know that I am not an ungrateful person. So, I tell you that if in this matter I should have to give up my rest and health, it would already be done. But where a matter of conscience is involved, friendship doesn't suffice, for I owe more to God than to anyone. Would to God the matter involved no more than a lack of dowry, for you already know -- and if you don't you should inquire for yourself -- that there are many nuns in these monasteries who have brought no dowry, while the dowry of this person is a good one. They are giving 500 ducats, which is enough for her to become a nun in any monastery.
2. Since Padre Olea doesn't know the nuns in these houses, I am not surprised by his disbelief. I know what servants of God they are and the innocence of their souls. I could never believe they would refuse the habit to anyone without many reasons. I know how scrupulous they usually are about these things, and for them to make a decision like that, they would have had to have good reasons. And since we are few nuns, the disturbance caused by those who are not suited for religious life is so great that even someone with an unscrupulous conscience would have a problem about accepting them; how much more would someone who seeks not to displease the Lord in anything.
3. Would you tell me how I could get them by force to take a nun if they do not vote in her favor -- and they are not doing so -- and if no prelate is even capable of doing this? And don't think this matters to Padre Olea. He has written to me that he has no greater interest in her than in anyone else he may pass on the street. It's because of my sins that you have been inspired by charity toward something in which I cannot be of help, and I feel badly about it. Even if I were to help, it wouldn't benefit her to stay where she is not wanted.
4. I have done even more in this case than was reasonable. And I asked them to keep her for another year of trial, contrary to their will, so that if I pass by there when I go to Salamanca I can become better informed about the whole matter. I'm doing this as a favor to Padre Olea that he may feel more satisfied. I see clearly that the nuns are not lying, for you know how even in matters of little importance such a thing would be far from their minds. It is nothing new for nuns to leave our communities; it is common. And nothing is lost if they say they didn't have the health for so austere a life, nor have I seen anyone less esteemed on this account.
5. Having learned my lesson by this, I will have to be more careful about what I do from here on. So, the person proposed by Señor Nicolao will not be accepted, even if you are more satisfied with her. I have other information, and I don't want to make enemies in order to do a favor for my lords and friends. It is strange that you would wonder why there is a discussion about this. Were we to behave otherwise, no nun would ever be accepted. I wanted to do him a favor, but I had received new information different from what I had first received, and I know Señor Nicolao desires what is good for these houses over anyone's particular good. So he was at peace with this.
6. For love of God don't speak any more about this. She has a good dowry and can enter some other community -- not one in which the numbers are so small that the nuns have to be extremely careful about whom they choose. And if up until now we were not so cautious in some cases -- although these are rare -- things turned out so badly that from now on we will be. And do not put us at odds with Señor Nicolao, which would happen if we had to send her away again.
7. I was amused by your saying that just by seeing her you will be able to recognize the kind of person she is. We women are not so easy to get to know. After many years of hearing confessions, confessors themselves are amazed at how little they have understood. And it is because women cannot express their faults clearly, and the confessors judge by what they are told. Padre, when you desire that one of these houses do you the favor of accepting somebody, send us those who are gifted for this life, and you will see that we will not make an issue over the dowry. When such talent is lacking, I can by no means be obliging.
8. You should know that I thought it would be easy to have a house in Madrid where the friars could stay. And even though the house were not a monastery, it wouldn't be unusual for them to have permission for Mass; it is given to caballeros for Mass in their homes. So, I informed our padre about this. He told me that it wouldn't be opportune since this could do harm to our cause, and I think he was right. And knowing his will in this matter, you shouldn't have decided to bring so many friars together and set up a church as though you had permission, which has made me laugh. I never even bought a house until I had permission from the ordinary of the place. You know well what it cost me in Seville for not having gotten this permission.
9. I told you often that until you have a letter from the nuncio granting permission, nothing should be done. When Don Jerónimo told me that you asked the friars of the observance, I was dumbfounded. So as not to resemble all of you by trusting them so much, at least for the moment, I have no intention of speaking to Valdemoro. I have a suspicion that any friendship he shows us is not intended for our good but only to catch us in something that he can report to his friends. And I wish you were as suspicious and would not trust him or make use of such friends for this affair. Leave the matter to the One to whom it belongs, that is to God, for His Majesty will take care of it in his time. Don't be in such a hurry, for that will ruin everything.
10. You should know that Don Diego Mejía is a very good gentleman and that he will do what he says. Since he has decided to speak about the matter, he must have come to know that his cousin will act in our favor. You should realize as well that if his cousin does not do it for him he will not do it for his aunt either. There's no reason to write to her or to anyone else. They are first cousins, and a relative and friend of Don Diego Mejía is to be highly esteemed. And it is also a good sign that the archdeacon has said he will present a report about us, for if he hadn't thought of doing it in our favor, he wouldn't have taken on this task. The matter is moving along well. You should not be stirring things up; you may make matters worse. Let's see what Don Diego and the archdeacon do. I will try to find out if there is anyone here who may be able to intervene. And if the dean can do anything, Doña Luisa will be able to get him to do so.
11. All of this has pleased me greatly and made me believe that God will make good use of this foundation; nothing came about through what we ourselves did. It's very nice that you have the house, for sooner or later we will have the permission. If the nuncio had given it to us, everything would now be over. May it please our Lord to give him the health that he sees is necessary in our regard. I tell you that by no means does Tostado lack confidence, nor am I sure that the One who began all this will give up working through him.
12. Regarding Salamanca, Padre Fray Juan de Jesús is in such a state, because of his quartan fevers, that I don't know what he could do; nor do you say what services he might be able to render. As for the college there, let us begin with what matters most, which is that the nuncio grant his permission. Once he has given it, the main thing is done. If mistakes are made in the beginning everything will be wiped out. What the bishop is requesting, in my opinion -- since he knows that Señor Juan Díaz is in Madrid and what he is doing there -- is to have someone in Salamanca who can do the same. And I don't know if our rule allows for your taking on the task of chaplains. It doesn't seem suitable to me, nor do I know what one could accomplish in two months, were the task to be accepted, other than annoy the bishop. Nor do I know how the Fathers would manage that kind of governing (for they will perhaps want to set high standards of perfection for that community, and such standards will not be suitable for those people). Nor do I know if the bishop would be pleased to have the friars.
13. I tell you there is more to do than you think and where we plan on gaining we will perhaps lose. Nor do I think our order will be seen as responsible if friars who are to be seen as contemplative hermits take on these chaplaincies -- for the friars are not wanted for any other reason -- and move about here and there with these kinds of women. I don't know how this will look, even though these women will be rescued from an evil way of life.
14. I raise these objections so that all of you there may consider them and then do what seems good to you, for I submit to that. You will arrive at a better decision. Read this passage to Señor Licentiate Padilla and to Señor Juan Díaz, for I don't know anything more to say than this. Permission from the bishop will always be sure in coming. Otherwise, I don't have confidence in Señor DonTeutonio as a great negotiator -- in his good will, yes; in his abilities, no.
15. I have been looking forward to being there so as to move this project along, for I am good at bargaining (if you don't think so, my friend Valdemoro will tell you). I wouldn't want the project to fail from your not explaining it well, for I have greatly desired that you have a house in Salamanca and one in Madrid. That you set aside thoughts of a foundation in Ciudad Real for a more opportune moment made me happy. I see no way in which it could have turned out well. All things considered, Malagón would be a much better place. Doña Luisa is eager to have you come and will provide well for your needs as time goes on, and there are many large towns in the surrounding area. I know you will not lack food.
16. And to have a justifiable pretext for abandoning the house in Madrid you could transfer it to Malagón. Let them think for now that you are not abandoning it definitively but only until the work on the house is completed. For you would appear irresponsible were you to start something one day and give it up the next.
17. I gave Don Jerónimo the letter for Don Diego Mejía. He will send it with another for the Count of Olivares. I will write him again when I see that it's necessary. Don't let the matter be forgotten. And I repeat that if he said clearly he would take it up and has discussed it with the archdeacon and considers it as good as done, he is a man of his word.
18. Now he has written me in favor of an aspirant. Would to God the two we let go had possessed her gifts; we wouldn't have had to refuse them. Father Visitator's mother has inquired about her. In mentioning this, it occurs to me that it would be good, under the pretext of saying something to Don Diego about this nun, to speak to him about the other matter and entrust it to him again. That is what I will do. Send the letter on to him. And remain with God, for I've really been lengthy, as though I had nothing else to attend to.
19. I'm not writing to Father Prior, because I have many other letters to write now, and he can consider this one as being for himself. Best regards to my Padre Padilla. I am giving much praise to our Lord because he is well. May His Majesty be with you always. I will strive to procure the document even if this means talking to Valdemoro -- and that would be doing a lot, for I don't believe he would do anything for us.
Today is the feast of the Virgins.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
20. Today they gave me other letters from you before Diego arrived. Send this letter to our padre with the first messenger; it's for some permissions. I am not writing anything to him about those business matters. So don't fail to write to him yourself about them.
21. That you may see whether or not my nuns surpass yours, I am sending you a section of a letter from the prioress in Beas. See the nice house she has found for the friars in La Peñuela; it has indeed given me great satisfaction. Surely, you would not have found one so quickly. They have accepted a nun whose dowry is worth 7,000 ducats. Two others are ready to enter with just as much. And they have already accepted a woman of illustrious background. She is the niece of the Count of Tendilla. The silver objects she has sent, the candelabra, cruets, and many other things, a reliquary, a crystal cross would all take too long to enumerate.
22. And now a lawsuit has been initiated against the nuns there, as you will find out in these letters. See what you can do. It would be important to speak to Don Antonio about this. Mention how high the grates are and that having the window open is more important to us than trying not to bother them. Well, see what you can do.
