To Padre Maestro Fray Jerónimo de la Madre de Dios, prior of Los Remedios.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. Today I received three letters from you by way of the chief courier and yesterday those that Fray Alonso brought. The Lord has repaid me well for the time it took them to arrive. May he be forever blessed that you are well. At first I was alarmed, for they gave me the packets from the prioress and I didn't see any letter from you in either of them. You can imagine what I felt. I was quickly put at ease. Always tell me which ones of mine you receive because you often do not respond to anything I ask you, and then on one letter you forgot to put the date.
2. In another, you ask me how I got along with Señora Doña Juana, but I had written to you about that through the mail carrier from here. I think your answer will come through the letter you say you sent me by way of Madrid, and so I am not very bothered by this. I am well, and my Isabel is our sole entertainment. It's extraordinary how gentle and cheerful she is. Yesterday, Señora Doña Juana wrote me. They are all well.
3. I have praised the Lord much over the way our business affairs are proceeding, but I was astonished by the things Fray Alonso told me they say about you. God help me! How necessary your trip was. Even if you did nothing else there, I think you were obliged in conscience to do so for the good of the order. I don't know how they were able to publish such great calumnies. May God give them light. If you had someone you could trust, it would be very good for you to grant them the favor of appointing another prior. But since you don't have anyone, I'm amazed at the one who gave you that advice. It would be like doing nothing. How wonderful it would be to have someone there who would not contradict everything. And if there does happen to be someone, it would be a real trial if the present prior refused to step down. Well, they're not known for having a desire to be held in little esteem.
4. It's no surprise. I'm more surprised that with so many things to do Paul has time to attend to the affairs of Joseph with so much calm. I praise the Lord greatly. Tell him that he should now be content with his prayer and not bother with the work of the intellect when God is favoring him in another way, for I am very happy over what he writes me. The fact is that in these interior things of the spirit what is more acceptable and certain is what leaves the best effects. I do not mean immediately with respect to many desires. Even though these are good, they do not at times amount to all that our self-love paints them to be. What I mean by the best effects are those confirmed by works and that the desires for the honor of God become apparent in an authentic solicitude for it and that the intellect and memory be occupied in how best to please him and show him the love one has for him.
5. Oh, this is real prayer, and not some delights for the sake of nothing more than our own satisfaction. And when these kinds of delight are present, they are accompanied by laxity and fears and feelings that we are not being esteemed sufficiently. I would not want any other prayer than that which makes the virtues grow in me. If it should be accompanied by great temptations, dryness, and trials leaving me with greater humility, I would consider it good prayer. That prayer is the best prayer that pleases God the most. It shouldn't be thought that he who suffers isn't praying, for he is offering this to God. And often he is praying much more than the one who is breaking his head in solitude, thinking that if he has squeezed out some tears he is thereby praying.
6. Pardon me for such a long message, but your love for Paul will enable you to bear it. And if you think what I say is good, tell him about it, and if not, don't. But I speak of what I would like for myself. I tell you works and a good conscience are a great thing.
7. I was amused by what happened to Padre Joanes. It could be that the devil had desired to do him some harm and that God had drawn some good from this. But the greatest caution is necessary, for I am certain that the devil will search out every device he can to harm Eliseo. And so it is good to see one of Patillas's tricks there. Thus I don't think it would be harmful to pay little attention to these things. If the purpose is to make Joanes do penance, God is already giving, and has given, him enough. He's not the only one to whom this happened, for his three councilors have also soon had to pay for it.
8. What Joseph then said for certain was that Clemente did nothing wrong, that if he had a fault it was due to his illness, and that in that region where they sent him he was at peace and that Joseph had previously told him about the trial they had planned to inflict on him. Laurencia learned nothing about it from Joseph, but knew only what the people were saying elsewhere. I don't think Joseph would reveal his secrets in that way, for he is very prudent. For my part I think they are calumniating him and the more I hear it said that he is speaking from other sources -- which she couldn't verify -- the more it seems to me to be Patillas's project. I am amused to see where he now casts his net. Why did he have to free him from his beatas so that his soul would make better progress? It would be good to ask for this freedom from the angel, although I would be happy if Patillas were cast out of this house by the means that are usually used. Be careful, for he will show who he is. I will place the matter before God. Angela in another letter will tell what she has thought about this matter. It was very wise to deal with this business under the seal of confession.
9. It will be necessary to make San Jerónimo eat meat for a few days and give up prayer, and tell her not to speak to anyone but you, or that she write to me, for her imagination is weak and what she meditates on she thinks she sees or hears. Sometimes, though, what she says will be true and has been, for she is a very good soul.
10. And I think that the same goes for Beatriz. I don't believe that what they write me about the date of her profession is a whim but very good. She, too, should fast only sparingly. Give these orders to the prioress telling her that from time to time she have them give up prayer and occupy themselves with other tasks so that things don't get worse; and believe me, this is necessary.
11. It made me sad that the letters were lost. And you do not tell me whether those that fell into the hands of Peralta were important. You should know that I am now sending a mail carrier. I have greatly envied the nuns for the joy they have had in hearing your sermons. It surely seems they deserve this; and I, the trials. Nonetheless, may God give me many more for love of him. I was troubled that you have to go to Granada. I would like to know how long you will be there, how I should write to you or where. For the love of God, keep me informed.
12. No signed blank sheets of paper have arrived. Would you send me a couple. I don't think I'll need them, for I see the work you have to do; and I would like to take on some of it so as to give you a little more quiet. May God give you the rest I want you to have and the holiness that he can give you, amen.
Today is 23 October.
Your paternity's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
