1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your paternity. During these past days I have written several times. Please God the letters will arrive. It pains me to see how many I write and how few you tell me you receive.
2. Today they brought me those from Valladolid. They tell me the permission for Casilda to make profession arrived from Rome and that she is overjoyed. I don't think you should put off giving your permission so as to wait until you can give her the veil, for we don't know what is going to happen in this life, and the surest course is the safest. So, for goodness' sake, I ask you to send your written permission at once by different routes, so that that little angel won't pine away, for the waiting is very costly to her. You will have already been told, or will be told, that the one to whom Casilda entrusted her report was Fray Domingo. However, if I have the time I will read the letters. If what I said is not included, I will send my report to you.
3. You should know that Perucho was here two days ago. He says that St. Paul persecuted the Christians and that still God touched his heart and that he can do the same for him making him turn over a new leaf. I think he will continue as long as it's convenient for him.
He's absolutely certain that Paul will come as visitator against them. He says he will be the first to give him a good welcome, that he has a brother whom the night owls expelled, a great saint and preacher, indeed without a fault, who was previously a Dominican; he wants him to join the eagles. If all this is true, it wouldn't do us any harm to take him, since we need preachers. The bad part is that it all seems to me to be a fable. Oh, what a great friend I have in him! God deliver us.
4. The one who is giving the property for the monastery would like them to say a Mass for him once a week, and he will provide for the construction of six nice cells. I told him you would not agree to this. I believe he will be content with less and even perhaps with nothing.
5. I am afraid of our losing Methuselah. Tell me what Angela ought to do if this should happen, for she will then be feeling scruples over obedience in regard to which monastery she should be living in. I see clearly that the one is in an out-of-the-way place and that Laurencia will be much worse off than where she is now, at least as regards her health. But it is really the place where her presence is most needed, so no attention should be paid to what pleases her, for on this earth it would be a mistake to take that into account. Well, her greatest happiness would lie in being near her confessor Paul, and there are more possibilities down there -- except for building a monastery. Where she is now is even worse than being in Avila as far as dealing with business matters goes. Whatever may be your decision, will you let her know it. If something were to happen and here they told her to go elsewhere, she would not be able to wait for your answer; and she would regret that very much.
6. Also consider if in the designation or choosing of a place for her, it would be fitting to take into account the monastery specified by the previous visitator, for apart from the need for her presence down there, it might be more perfect for her to go to that specified place than to decide on one by herself. So consider carefully, padre, what may be the suitable thing to do in this regard. For whether we make a mistake or do what is right the matter will be public. I don't think it will be long before we will have another Methuselah; but maybe it will be.
7. Oh, God help me! What great freedom this woman has in all that takes place. It doesn't seem that anything bad can happen to her or to her Paul. The words of Joseph are powerful, for they can produce results like this. But what learning and eloquence Paul has! It's something to praise God for. May you recommend all this to him, and answer me, for heaven's sake, for nothing is lost in following your counsel, and much could be lost in following other opinions. Let us pray hard for Methuselah and for the great angel, about whom I feel the most distress without my knowing why. May His Majesty give him health and preserve you for many years with great holiness, amen, amen.
Today is 4 November.
Your paternity's unworthy subject and true daughter.
Teresa of Jesus
