1. Jesus be with you, mi padre. Each time I see letters arriving from your paternity, and how frequently they are coming, I would like to kiss your hands to thank you for having permitted me to remain in this place, for I don't know what I would have done without the relief of living here. May God be blessed for everything. Last Friday I answered some letters from you. Now I've received some more, the ones you wrote from Paterna and Trigueros. The later one was full of worries, and with every reason.
2. Despite all your motives for remaining there, I wish that after you have visited those marquises you would go to see the "angel,"since the letter from him is so insistant, even though it would mean a hardship for you. For even if he is mistaken, these matters are difficult to deal with by letter, and we owe him so much. It seems that God has placed him there for our help, for error itself will turn to our benefit if we follow his opinion. Be careful, mi padre, for the love of God, not to displease him, for down there you are deprived of good counsel, and you would cause me much disturbance.
3. I am disturbed also to learn from the prioress how that "saint" is not carrying out the duties of his office well, and even more disturbed by his lack of courage. For love of God, tell him in a way that he will understand that justice will be rendered to him as well as to others.
4. I'm writing this in such a hurry that I am not going to be able to say all that I would like. I was forced to receive a visitor just when I was about to begin this letter, and now it is late at night, and the muleteer is going to deliver it. Since he is so reliable I don't want to miss telling you again what I've already written to you -- that is, that the Royal Council has stipulated that Tostado is not to make a visitation of the four provinces. The one who wrote us about this has seen this ordinance, and his letter was read to me. However, I don't consider the one who read it to be very trustworthy. But I think he was in this case, and I don't think he had any reason for lying. Whatever the case, I hope in God that everything will go well, for the Lord is turning Paul into an enchanter.
5. If I had no other reason to serve the Lord than this, I would consider it a sufficient one. Certainly the way things are unfolding is admirable. You ought to know that for some time Esperanza has not been praising Paul to me, and now he wrote to speak wonders about him and wants me to give him my blessing. What will he do when he learns about how things have been dealt with at Paterna? Indeed, I marvel to see how the Lord is intermingling sorrows with joys, for this is the strait path along which his plans are brought about.
Teresa of Jesus
6. You should know, padre, that in a certain manner it is a delight for me when you tell me about your trials, although the matter of the calumny offended me deeply, not on account of what regarded you but on account of the nuns. Since the perpetrators are not finding anyone to be a witness, they are looking for someone who they think will not talk, but she will know how to defend herself, as well as her son Eliseo, better than anyone else in the world.
7. Yesterday a Father from the Society wrote me, as well as did a lady from Aguilar del Campo, a nice town thirteen leagues from Burgos. She is a sixty-year-old widow with no children. She has had a serious illness and, desiring to do a good work with her estate (which amounts to 600 ducats in income and a good house and garden), she was told about these monasteries. This appealed to her so much that in her will she left everything for this purpose. Well, she continued to live, but still has a great desire to found a monastery, and so she wrote to me asking that I give a reply. It seems to me to be far away, although perhaps God desires that this be done.
8. Also, in Burgos there are so many women who desire to enter that it is a pity there is no place for them to do so. Well, I will not discourage her but simply reply that I will seek more information about the locality and everything else until I see what you will ordain and if with your brief you can accept monasteries of nuns. For although I cannot go, you could send others. Don't forget to tell me what you decide to have me do in this regard.
9. I have someone in Burgos who can provide me with information. If she gives everything (which she will), it will easily amount to 9,000 ducats, and more with the houses added in, and the distance from Valladolid is not too great. It must be very cold there, but this lady says they have good hedges to protect themselves from it.
10. Oh, mi padre, how I would like to share with you those worries, and how well you do to complain to the one who becomes so afflicted over your sufferings. And how it pleases me to see you so close to the cicadas. The result there should be most fruitful. I hope in God that he will provide for them in their poverty. I want to tell you that San Francisco wrote me a letter that made a great deal of sense. May God be with them. Their affection for Paul pleased me very much, and I rejoice -- although not as much -- that he loves them. I already love the nuns in Seville and I love them more each day for the care they take of the one whom I myself would like to be taking care of and serving. May God be praised that he gives you such good health. Be on guard, for love of God, about what you eat in those monasteries. I am well and happy to have such frequent news of you. May His Majesty watch over you and make you as holy as I beg him to, amen.
Today is the eve of our Lady's Conception.
Your paternity's unworthy daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
