1. Jesus be with your reverence. I received the packet of letters which included the one from the prioress of Paterna. The many others you mention will perhaps come tomorrow, which is Thursday. They are safe being sent by this route -- they won't be lost. I was delighted with the ones that have arrived, and also the one from you. May God be blessed for everything.
2. Oh, padre, what joy comes to my heart when I see someone from this order -- where God has been so offended -- promoting something that is for his honor and glory, and preventing some sins! Yet I feel distressed and envious to see what little use I am in this matter. I would embrace trials and dangers if I could have a share in the spoils of those who are in the midst of them. Sometimes, since I am so wretched, I rejoice to have this calm for myself here. And when I receive news about the trials they are going through down there, I feel undone and I envy the nuns in Paterna. I am overjoyed that God is beginning to make use of the discalced nuns, for often, when I see souls so courageous in these houses, I think that it would not be possible for God to give them so much without a reason. Even if this amounts to no more than their having lived in that monastery -- for, after all, they avoided any offense against God there -- I am most happy. And how much more so in that I hope in His Majesty their presence there will be most beneficial.
3. Don't forget to include in the document for the friars the authority also to give permission for the foundation of houses for nuns. You ought to know that my confessor here is Doctor Velázquez, who is a canon of this church and a most learned servant of God -- you can easily check this out. He can't accept the idea that no more monasteries for nuns are to be founded, and he ordered me that through Señora Doña Luisa, by way of the ambassador, I try to obtain permission from the general, and if not from him from the pope. He says they should say that our monasteries are mirrors for Spain and that he will provide a draft of the letter. I am informing you about a foundation that is being offered to us. Please answer me on these two matters.
4. I have been greatly consoled by this note you sent me -- May God reward you -- although your words were about something already fixed deeply in my heart. How is it that you say nothing about Fray Baltasar? Give my regards to all.
5. I have to laugh that Padre Fray Juan de Jesús says I want you all to go barefoot, for I am the one who always opposed this to Padre Fray Antonio. He would have found out that he was mistaken had he asked me. My intention was to attract people of talent, for they would be frightened away by a lot of austerity. What was set down was only so as to distinguish ourselves from the other Carmelites. It could be that I said their feet would be just as cold as when bare.
6. I said something similar when we were talking about how bad it looked for friars to be going around barefoot on good mules; the two don't fit together. Mules shouldn't be permitted except for long journeys or in great need. Some young friars came here traveling by donkey when the distance was short and they could have walked. And so I repeat it doesn't look right for these young discalced friars to be traveling on mules and with saddles. That they go about barefoot never entered my mind; there are already too many doing so. Advise them not to do so but to follow the custom. Write about this to our padre.
7. What I have insisted on with him is that the friars be given good meals. I am well aware of what you say, and it often saddens me -- and even yesterday, or today, before I saw your letter I was sad. It seemed to me on observing the way they treat themselves that within no more than a couple of days everything could fall apart. I turned to God for comfort, for he who started this work will set everything right, and so I was delighted that you share this opinion.
8. The other thing I urged that he impose is manual work, even if it is no more than making baskets or something, and that this be done during the recreation hour if there is no other time. This is most important where there are no studies. Understand, padre, that I am fond of strictness in the practice of virtue but not of austerity, as you see in our houses of nuns. This is perhaps so because I am not very penitential. I praise our Lord greatly because he gives you so much light in matters of such importance. It is great to desire his honor and glory in everything. May it please His Majesty to give us the grace to die a thousand deaths for this, amen, amen. Today is Wednesday 12 December.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
9. You are being very charitable in sending me those letters, for our padre writes only very briefly when he writes me. I am not surprised by this, and I even beg him to do so. Well, I praise the Lord when I read them, and you should too because you were the initiator of that work. Don't fail to speak often with the archdeacon. We also have with us the dean and the other canons. I am already making new friends.
