1. Jesus be with your reverence, my daughter. You must have experienced a happy Christmas since you have mi padre there, for I would too, and happy New Year. It seems that things down there are not going to end so quickly, and I am already feeling anguish over the loneliness his absence causes us up here. Oh what freezing cold we're having! It is not much different than in Avila. Nonetheless, I am well, although I am longing to receive a letter from down there because it seems a long time since I have received any. The mail is as slow in getting up to us as it is in getting down to you. Truly, everything seems slow to one with longings.
2. From your note at the top of your letter I see that you are feeling better since you have been bled; what I want to know is whether the fever has gone away. I was happy to receive your letter and would be much happier to see you. I would be particularly happy now, for I feel that we are very close friends, for there are few others with whom I would enjoy speaking about any number of things. You certainly please me, and so I rejoice to see from your letters that you have come to understand, and that if it pleases God we see each other again you wouldn't be foolish, for you have come to know how I love you, and so I feel much tender compassion for you in your illness.
3. As for the illness of Mother Prioress of Malagón, no one understands it. They say she is somewhat better, but the high fever doesn't go away, nor can she get up. I so much wish she could get well enough to be brought here. Don't fail to pray much for her. Since I know I don't have to insist on this with you, I don't repeat it every time.
4. Don't you notice that every time I write to mi padre, I find pleasure in writing you, however busy I am? Well, I tell you that I myself am surprised at this. And I should write to my Gabriela sometimes! My best regards to her, and to Beatriz, and to her mother and to all the nuns.
5. I am writing to mi padre that it is very important, since they need nuns at Paterna -- I mean lay sisters -- that he send some of ours, for these would be a help to the other nuns who I assure you are few in number. Send them my regards, and always let me know how they are doing. Fray Ambrosio told me how good our padre's health is. I felt very grateful to you, for I think a major part of this is due to your care for him. Blessed be God who grants us so many favors. Many regards to Padre Fray Antonio. Since he never answers me, I don't write to him. Insofar as possible try not to let him know about all the letters I write; tell mi padre not to say anything to him about them. My regards to Garciálvarez and anyone else you happen to see. It has just occurred to me to ask what you did for early Christmas morning. Let me know, and remain with God. May His Majesty make you a saint, as I beg of him.
It is the third day of January.
6. My brother wrote me yesterday. The freezing cold isn't doing him any harm. The favors he is receiving in prayer are something to praise God for. He attributes them to the prayers of the discalced nuns. He is making much progress and doing good for all of us. Do not forget him.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
Turn the page.
7. I gave the paper from our padre, the one he wrote to Garciálvarez, to a sister to copy, for it is excellent for every house and for Avila. It seems the devil made it disappear. Anyway, send me another like it in good script, and don't forget.
