1. Jesus be with you, my daughter. My congratulations to you and your daughter on the occasion of her taking the veil. May it please God that you have the joy of her presence for many years and that you both serve him with the holiness that I have begged of him during these days, amen.
2. I would love to write a long letter to answer yours, and certainly I now have the opportunity, but it could do me great harm, for I am very tired. I already had the thought of not writing until I had more time, but I am doing this so that you will know I have received all your letters. They are arriving here very safely. I am not sending the pope's dispensation, for it is in Latin and I have not yet found anyone to translate it for me. I will send it to you later. They gave it to me yesterday, the feast of St. Sebastian. It inspired the sisters with much devotion, and me as well. May God be blessed, for thus everything has been concluded. The fact that Señora Doña María is happy makes me so as well, very much so. Give her my very best wishes, and a good embrace to my Casilda; how I would love to do so personally. It would have given me great joy to be there. You did well to pay great attention to the friars; that must have added more solemnity to the ceremony.
3. In regard to what you say about the other nun's dowry, you told me that it would be necessary to take out fifty ducats for the trip. I asked you that if this were so, why you said the dowry would be six hundred ducats. Don't specify any amount. I don't remember about the trousseau. If she is all they say she is, it makes no difference if what she brings doesn't amount to much. For I tell you that we really need talented nuns. Be assured that she will bring what she has. You already know that if the nuns are very suited for us, we don't have to be so concerned about the dowry. Her mistress is saddened to death that they are taking her away, from what I have been told. And this must be true, so she will not give her much help. Her master has been well informed that it must be restored to him if she does not live up to what he says of her. I have been so insistent about taking this nun that I have wondered if it were not a temptation.
4. Read the enclosed letter, close and seal it, and entrust it to Agustín de Vitoria, or to someone you are sure will deliver it promptly, for it is not possible to pay the portage and it must be delivered safely.
5. Father Visitator is so avid about your taking that house that as soon as you are in agreement, I will send Antonio Gaytán. He has been commissioned by the visitator to sign the deeds. Once this is decided, a way will be provided for dealing with that woman, for she is old and very sick, and something must be done because the need of souls there is great. May God direct the matter and watch over you, for you have carried out your affairs well. May he be blessed who does it all, for you are very wretched.
Today is 21 January.
Your servant,
Teresa of Jesus
