1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit always be in your soul, and may he give your honor his holy love and fear, amen. Padre Doctor Pablo Hernández has written me about the favor and alms you are granting me by wanting to found a house for this holy order. Indeed, I believe that our Lord and his glorious Mother, my Patroness and Lady, has moved your heart to so holy a work, which I hope His Majesty will make good use of. And I hope you will as a result receive many spiritual blessings. May it please the Lord to accomplish this, as all the sisters and I beg him; and from now on the entire order will be praying for you. This has been a great consolation for me, and so I desire to meet you that I might offer myself in your presence as your servant; may you consider me so from now on.
2. Our Lord has been pleased to free me from the fever. I am hurrying as much as possible so that when I leave here things will be to my satisfaction, and I believe that with the grace of our Lord the work will soon be finished. I promise you that I won't lose time, or pay attention to my illness should the fever return, but will leave at once. It is only right that, since you are doing everything, I should do my part, which is nothing, and endure some trial. We ought not strive for anything else, those of us who seek to follow the one who, without deserving any trials, always lived in the midst of them.
3. I do not think I will gain only one benefit from this work, for according to Padre Pablo Hernández I stand to gain much from knowing you. Up to this point I have been sustained by the prayers of others, so I beg you for the love of our Lord, not to forget me in yours.
4. I think that unless His Majesty ordains otherwise I will be in that city, at the latest, two weeks after the beginning of Lent. Even though I will leave here soon, I will be stopping for a few days at the monasteries that the Lord has been pleased to found during these past years. My stay will be as short as possible, since that is your desire; although in matters that are so well taken care of, I will have nothing else to do but behold and praise our Lord. May His Majesty always guide you and give you life and health and the increase of grace that I beg of him, amen.
Today is 9 January.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
