For Mother Prioress in Seville.
1. Jesus be always with your reverence, my daughter. Last month I wrote to you by way of a muleteer from this city, and my brother also wrote. In the letter I mentioned that our business matters had gotten complicated. You will have learned this from Padre Fray Gregorio in a more complete way than I could have then put in writing. Now, God be blessed, they are proceeding very well, better each day. Our padre is well, and he still retains his commission, although I would very much like to see him liberated from those people. They make up so many things that it would be impossible to put them all in writing. But the good part is that everything ends up raining down on their own backs and turns out to our benefit.
2. You will have already learned how Fray Miguel and Fray Baltasar retracted. Fray Miguel swears that he wrote nothing in the memorandum and that they made him sign it, with force and threats. He said this and other things in the presence of witnesses and a notary, and before the Blessed Sacrament. The king understood that this is evil and so they do nothing but harm themselves. My head is in a wretched state. Pray for me and for these brothers that God will enlighten them for the salvation of their souls.
3. I tell you that what is going on at the Incarnation is of a kind, I think, never before seen. By orders of Tostado the provincial of the calced friars came here fifteen days ago for the election with threats of great censures and excommunications for anyone who might cast a vote for me. Despite this, they paid no heed, and as though he had said nothing to them at all, fifty-five nuns voted for me. As each vote for me was given to him, he excommunicated the nun, and he cursed and pounded and beat the ballots with his fist and burned them. He has left the nuns excommunicated for fifteen days now without their being allowed to hear Mass or enter the choir, even when the Divine Office is being said. And they cannot speak to anyone, not even their own confessors or parents. And what is most amusing is that the day after this pounding election the provincial returned and called them together for an election, but they answered that there was no need for another election because they had already had one. And seeing this he excommunicated them again and called the remaining nuns, which numbered forty-four, and had them elect another prioress and sent the result to Tostado for confirmation.
4. Now she has been confirmed in office, but the others are holding fast and say they will not obey her except as a vicaress. Learned men say that the nuns are not excommunicated and that the friars are acting contrary to the Council in confirming a prioress who received an insufficient number of votes. The other nuns sent word to Tostado that they want me for prioress. His answer was no; if I wanted, I could go there to live in seclusion but it would be inadmissible for me to go as prioress. I don't know where it will all end up.
5. This, in sum, is what is happening now, for all are stunned to see something like this which offends everyone. I would gladly pardon the nuns if they would leave me in peace, for I have no desire to find myself in that Babylon -- and even less so because of my poor health. And it gets even worse when I'm in that house. May God do what serves him most and free me from them.
6. Teresa is well and sends you her regards. She is a lovely child and has grown a great deal. Pray for her that God may make her his servant. Let me know whether the widow has entered -- as has been my wish -- and whether her sister has returned to the Indies.
7. I have felt a longing to speak to you about many things, which would be consoling for me. But some day I will have more time and a safer messenger than the one who is going to bring this. Señora Doña Luisa is a great help and favors us in every way. Pray for her and for the Archbishop of Toledo, and don't ever forget the king.
