1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor, mi padre, and may he give you health this Lent for the work I see that you have ahead of you. I am wondering if you will have to be moving from place to place. For the love of God watch out lest you have a fall along the way. For since my arm has been in the state it is, I am very careful in this regard. It is still swollen, as is also my hand, and covered with plaster, which looks like armor, and so I get little use out of it.
2. It's extremely cold here now, which it hasn't been except at the beginning of winter. In fact the weather has been so good that it was much colder, at least for me, in Toledo. This perhaps is due to the door you ordered us to have made for the little room next to the one you said should become the infirmary. After this was done, the little room is like a stove. Anyway, I have been getting along extremely well in this cold weather. You always meet with success in the orders you give. May it please the Lord that I meet with success in obeying you. I would love to know if Padre Fray Antonio de Jesús is continuing to improve and what has happened to Padre Mariano who has so forgotten me. Give my regards to Padre Fray Bartolomé.
3. I am sending along a letter that the provincial of the Society sent me about the Carillo matter, which displeased me so much that I wanted to send him a worse answer than I did. For I know that they told him I had no part to play in this proposal, which is true. When I heard about it, I got very upset, as I wrote you, and greatly desired that he not proceed any further. I wrote him a letter urging him as strongly as I could not to do so, as I swear in this response of mine to the provincial. Their attitude toward me is such that if I do not use strong words, they will not believe me. And it is most important that they believe me so that they don't keep thinking that I received the revelations they speak of and used them to persuade him, which is a big lie. But I tell you that I have so little fear of their threats that I am amazed at the freedom God gives me. So, I told the rector that neither the entire Society nor the whole world could keep me from carrying out something I understand to be for the service of God, but that in this matter I neither did nor would intervene.
4. The rector nonetheless asked me to write to Padre Salazar and say what I said in the enclosed letter, that he can not do what he proposes without incurring excommunication.
5. I asked the rector if Carillo knew of these briefs. He replied that he understood them better than I. I then answered that I was certain he would not do anything that would offend God. He replied that because of his great attraction he could be fooled and rush ahead with his desire. So I sent him a letter by the means which he used to send his.
6. Well, mi padre, see their simplicity. From certain indications I understood clearly that my letter had been opened, but I didn't mention this to him. I told him in my letter (knowing that they would read it) not to trust his brothers, that Joseph, too, had brothers. In fact, his own friends must have revealed his plan, and I am not surprised, for his brothers are extremely disturbed. They must be afraid that this might set a precedent.
7. I asked him whether there were not some in the Society who had become discalced friars. He answered yes, that some had become Franciscans, but that the Society had first dismissed them and that afterward they received the permission to enter the Franciscans. I said that the Society could do the same thing in this case. But they are not thinking of doing this, nor am I thinking of telling him not to pursue his plans but only of cautioning him, as I do in this letter and leaving the matter to God. If it is God's will, they will give their consent. Otherwise (as I say here in this letter), a transfer would certainly not be possible -- I have inquired about this. Those who are advising him must be basing themselves on the common law, as did another canonist who tried to persuade me at the time of the foundation in Pastrana that I could accept an Augustinian nun, but he was mistaken. The pope could give his permission, but I don't think that will come about, for they will block the way. Would you inquire about this and advise him, for I would be extremely disturbed if some offense were committed against God. I am sure that he would not knowingly do so.
8. I am very worried, for if he remains among them after they know of his desire to transfer, he will not have the credibility he is accustomed to. We couldn't allow him to join us save under the most favorable circumstances. And I am always aware of what we owe to the Society, and I don't think God would permit them to do us harm for a reason like this. But to refuse to receive Padre Salazar out of fear of the Society would be wrong and would be a poor recompense for his affection. May God direct everything; may he guide him. But I fear that Padre Salazar will let himself be prompted by some experiences in prayer that he mentions and to which he gives too much credit. I have very often mentioned this to him, but that's not enough.
9. I am also sorry that the nuns in Beas must have said something to him about this, so great was Catalina de Jesús' desire for him to transfer. The good thing in all this is that he is definitely a servant of God and if he is mistaken it is in thinking that this is what God wants, and His Majesty will look after him. But he has got us into trouble, and if I hadn't heard from Joseph what I wrote to you, believe me that I would have done all I could to prevent it. But even though I do not believe as much in those things, it costs me a great deal to try to dissuade him. Who can say that I would not be hindering some great good from coming to that soul? You should realize that in my opinion he does not have the spirit of the Society. I have always thought so.
10. Ardapilla wrote me about this matter telling me to try to get the ravens to write to Joanes asking him to send someone here to inquire about it. I would be delighted, as long as I didn't have to get involved, but so many difficulties came to mind that I excused myself as best I could. I realize that he did it for our good, but you know that if we don't get to the root of a thing there is no other way to provide a remedy, unless Paul lends a hand. May the Lord bring this about, for I desire it very much. I worry about being the obstacle causing everyone to suffer. I have at times said that it would perhaps be best for them to throw me into the sea, as was done with Jonah, that the storm might pass. Perhaps my sins have caused all this.
11. The prioress of Seville wrote to ask me to petition you to give permission for her to accept another sister of the Portuguese nun, Blanca, who is not old enough to enter, in fact must be far from it. This would provide a great help for them to pay the rent on the house. I don't recall how much it comes to. It wouldn't be a bad thing if the parents in paying the dowry for Blanca would lend the community what they would plan on giving for her sister, or pay the interest instead of providing for her food. The nuns never finish speaking of how much they owe this Portuguese woman. You can consider this and do what you think best.
12. I don't know when to stop when I write you. My brother always tells me to give you his best wishes. Accept these now all together and along with them those of all the sisters. May our Lord watch over you and bring you here soon, for your presence is very necessary, both for my sake and for other reasons. I don't mean that there is any problem you do not know about. Doña Guiomar is doing poorly. She rarely comes here, for that humor from which she suffers is completely destroying her.
13. As quickly as you can send this letter for Padre Salazar by way of the prior of Granada, and insist that the prior give it to him secretly. For I fear that through the Society he will write to me again or to some of our sisters, and his code language is easy to decipher. You could send it by way of Madrid, paying good postage, urgently entrusting it to Roque and making use of this same muleteer; it will be safe. Be careful, mi padre, and don't forget, for it is important to send this letter to Padre Salazar and that he not take any further steps -- if he hasn't already. And you should delay giving permission, in my opinion, for all of this is for his greater good. May God also give you, padre mio, all the blessings I desire for you, amen.
It is the First Sunday of Lent.
14. This letter from Father Provincial and the reply may be useful to us some day. Do not tear it up, if you so think.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
