1. Jesus be with your paternity, my good padre. The day before yesterday I learned that Señora Doña Juana arrived in Valladolid in good health. And on the vigil or feast of Saint Angelus, they gave the habit to Señora Doña María. May it please God to direct this to his own honor and make her very holy. The prioress in Medina also wrote me that they would have gladly given her the habit if she had so desired, but I don't think she would care for that. As I wrote to you, the nuns in Valladolid were very sorry that you did not go there. I already told them that you will go soon, with God's help, and certainly the need for you there is great. Once Tostado leaves, there will be nothing to fear.
2. I am writing to Padre Mariano that if he comes with the Sicilian he should arrange to have you come with them. For if he wants to reach an agreement on what he says in his letter, your presence will be necessary. I assure you that if what this friar says is true and we take these means, the negotiations with our Father General will most likely be successful. All the other possibilities seem to entail endless delay, and if after we pursue this course we find that it didn't work out for us, we will still have time. May the Lord guide things well.
3. If this padre doesn't come here, I wish you would arrange to see him. I think that in everything it is necessary that we speak together, even if what you do is right. A short while ago I wrote you at length and so today I am being brief, for today they brought me letters from Caravaca, which I have to answer, and I am also writing to Madrid.
4. Oh, mi padre, I almost forgot! The woman came to cure my arm, for the prioress in Medina did very well in sending her. The cure involved a real struggle both for the woman and for me. I had lost the use of my wrist, for it has been a long time since I fell. So the pain and toil were terrible. Nonetheless, I rejoiced to feel some little part of what our Lord suffered. I think the effort was successful, although the tormenting pain is such that it is difficult to know if the cure is complete. I can move the hand well and lift the arm as far as my head, but it will still take time before everything is all right. Believe me, if this had been delayed just a bit more, I would have ended up crippled. In truth, I would not have been terribly distressed, if God so willed. There were so many people who came to see the woman in my brother's house that one didn't know how to manage them all.
5. I assure you, mi padre, that since your departure from here, sufferings of every kind have had their day. Sometimes it seems, when they come one upon the other, that the body grows tired and the soul fainthearted, although the will, in my opinion, fares well.
God be with you always. Pray for these daughters of yours. Today is the vigil of the Ascension. Doña Guiomar is doing better; she is here.
Your paternity's unworthy daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
