1. ... the truth of all the letters she writes to him, whereas at first he wrote to her quite frequently and treated her favorably. Nor does he write to or deal with the other monasteries, but acts as though he were not their superior. Obviously they must have said things to him that drove him to such an extreme.
2. What is requested from his most reverend paternity are three things very important for those monasteries. First, if possible, that he become persuaded not to accept as true what they have told him about Teresa of Jesus, for truly she has done nothing but be a very obedient daughter. This is the whole truth and nothing else can be said against her. And since he knows that she would not tell a lie for anything on earth and he has seen for himself what prejudiced persons are likely to do and that they do not communicate with her, he must try to be correctly informed. And since he is the shepherd, he must not condemn unjustly without hearing all sides. If, nonetheless, only what they have said carries weight, may it lead him to apply the penalty and punish her and give her a penance so that she no longer remain in his disfavor. For any punishment would be easier for her than to see him angered. Parents are wont to forgive their children for even serious faults, all the more when there aren't any. But she has instead suffered many great trials in founding these monasteries, meaning to please him. For apart from his being her superior she has the greatest love for him. Let him not allow so many servants of God to remain in his disfavor since nobody places any blame on them. Let him consider them to be his daughters as he always has and recognize them as such, for their works deserve this.
3. Second, since the office of apostolic visitator has now terminated and these monasteries of discalced nuns are immediately under his lordship's jurisdiction that he assign superiors to whom they may have recourse whether for visitations or for the other many things that surface; and that these superiors be from among the discalced friars of the primitive rule, and that he not order them to be governed by the friars of the mitigated rule, because their way of life in many respects is very different from that of these latter friars, and it is impossible for anyone not living as they do to be able to understand and offer a remedy for any faults that exist. He knows how poorly they did under these friars. And whenever he pleases, he may inquire about how badly the task has been carried out by the friar he has ultimately appointed and whom the nuns themselves chose as the best. And this perhaps is not the fault of that friar but due to the fact that he has no experience of the life, as I said, which causes much harm. Furthermore, setting this aside, both apostolic visitators have issued statutes prescribing that the discalced nuns be subject to his lordship and to the one appointed as his representative, who should be a friar living under the primitive rule -- I mean a discalced friar -- in view of the harm that resulted from the opposite procedure.
4. If he does not agree to this, it should be explained to his most reverend paternity -- not as something coming from the discalced nuns, but as a surmise -- that, since his lordship is so far away, they would rather be subject to their bishop than agree to be governed and visited by the calced friars. These latter could cause much harm before any remedy comes, as he already knows has happened. And this in part has been the reason why our houses have not resisted the visitators, which as reformed they could have done; they did not want to find themselves subject to the calced friars, having learned their lesson.
5. You must not even speak of this unless, after having insisted strongly on the preceding point, you find that his lordship still does not want to heed the nuns. For indeed it would be an indescribable torment for them to have to cease being subject to our Father General, unless they would otherwise end up lost and without protection. Apart from the fact that they are highly esteemed both by the king and by people of high rank, there are women of quality among them, and they are not lacking the money for their needs. All of these monasteries are now established and they are not in need, and some of them were founded by illustrious persons. May God not allow them to be drawn into a situation in which they would be required to withdraw from so good a shepherd. God forgive the one who has sown such a weed. This is a most important point, which, for love of our Lord, you must highly stress.
6. Once a province for the discalced friars is established, the monasteries of nuns will always be entrusted to the provincial. Even though their conversation in these monasteries is with God alone, it would be opportune if, in matters pertaining to mortification and perfection, they were placed, if possible, under the authority of Padre Maestro Fray Jerónimo de la Madre de Dios Gracián. He has been a visitator these past years; and with his spirit and discretion and gentleness, so perfect and upright that it seems the Blessed Virgin has chosen him, these nuns will make great progress. In every visitation they say they experience a renewal of their desires and many benefits.
7. If this could be done, it would be what is most fitting, and none of them would say anything else. But it seems to be impossible, for the most reverend general is very displeased with him also, as he is with Teresa of Jesus, and even much more so for reasons that will be mentioned when the rest of the facts are stated. He is the one who has been apostolic visitator by order of the previous nuncio and the king. And considering the calumnies they raise against him, it is no wonder that the general is so aloof.
8. It would be of great service to God if this could be brought about, but it seems impossible. So it is necessary to name other friars, either Padre Presentado Fray Antonio de Jesús or Padre Fray John of the Cross, for these two fathers were the first discalced friars, and they are very great servants of God. And if he should not want either of them, let it be anyone his lordship might appoint, as long as he not be a calced friar or an Andalusian. Do as much as possible, for as time passes, another course of action, with the help of the Lord, may present itself. It will be great at first just to be free from the calced friars.
9. Any of these visitators, whoever he may be, in recognition of the most reverend general, must take care when making the visitation each year to send the ordinary taxes to the general; and if he does not do so -- but he will because he is obliged to -- the monasteries will send it. If the monasteries are given Padre Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián as visitator, they will double the amount, and if they even gave much more, they would gain because of how important this is to them. It goes without saying that what was just said should not be mentioned except to a companion of the most reverend general after finding out who is closest to him. And it would be well to speak first with him about all that was said. It would be most important to win by words and deeds the favor of those close to him so that the effort will bear fruit.
10. The third request is that his lordship be pleased not to bind the superior who governs these monasteries more rigidly than are those of all the other religious orders. For if they are given a monastery or a house for the religious life or procure one themselves for nuns, they have the power to bring some nuns there so as to begin the foundation. Without this provision, the order could be poorly planted. And never has a general been opposed to this for his order; rather generals help and rejoice that new foundations are multiplying, as the most reverend general of the Carmelite order used to do before he was so badly informed. One does not understand what could have been said to him about people who are so religious, and give and have given such good example, and went with so much modesty and piety to live in the monasteries, that he should take from them a good that all religious orders enjoy, as was said.
11. In the general chapter, the most reverend general gave orders that, under pain of excommunication, no nun should leave her monastery and that prelates should not consent to her doing so, especially Teresa of Jesus. The latter, when a house was ready, went with some nuns to establish the observance of the order there and take possession of the house in accordance with the patent letters that had been given her by the most reverend general with the greatest zeal. Those who saw these foundations were edified as will be seen if more information is necessary ...
