To my illustrious and Very Reverend Señor Don Hernando, prior of Las Cuevas in Seville.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. What do you think of the way things are going in that house of the glorious St. Joseph and how they are treating and have treated those daughters of his? And this is happening over and beyond all the spiritual trials and grief that for a long time they have been suffering from one who should have been consoling them. I think it is apparent that they have been praying fervently to God for trials. May he be blessed forever.
2. I certainly do not worry much about the nuns who went there earlier with me to make the foundation, and I even feel joy in seeing all that they will gain in this war the devil wages against them. I do, however, feel bad for those who entered there afterward, for when they should be learning about the order and how to remain quiet, they are very distracted by all the turmoil, which can do much harm to souls that are new. May the Lord provide a remedy. I tell you that for some time the devil has been trying to disturb them. I wrote to the prioress to talk to you about all her trials. She must not have had the courage to do so. It would be great consolation for me to be able to speak openly with you, but I don't dare do so in writing. If this messenger were not so reliable, I wouldn't even mention this.
3. This young man came to ask me if I knew anyone down there who would kindly vouch for him for some service job. Since the weather is cold up here and is very harmful for him, he cannot stay here, even though he is a native of this place. The one he has been serving, who is a canon here and friend of mine, assures me that he is virtuous and faithful. He has good handwriting and knows how to do sums. I beg you, for love of our Lord, if you see some opening that would be suitable for him, do me a favor that would be of service to His Majesty, by giving him a recommendation, if needed, for the things I mentioned. The one from whom I know these things would never tell me anything but the whole truth.
4. I was happy when he spoke to me, for it gave me the chance to find comfort in communicating with you and asking you to tell the previous prioress along with the other nuns who came from up here to read this letter of mine. You will have learned how they deprived the prioress of office and replaced her with someone who entered there and how the nuns suffered many other persecutions and were even made to surrender the letters I had written them, which are already in the hands of the nuncio. The poor nuns truly missed having someone to counsel them. The learned men here are astonished at the things they were made to do through fear of excommunication.
5. My fear is that the interrogators have completely confused the nuns. This must have happened without it being realized, for in the process things were deduced from the nuns' remarks that are totally false, for I was present there at the time the supposed events occurred, and nothing of the sort took place. But I am not surprised that they managed to confuse the nuns, for in one case the interrogation lasted six hours, and someone of little intelligence may have signed everything they asked her to sign. We benefitted from this here by being careful about what we were signing, and so they had nothing to say against us.
6. For a year and a half our Lord has afflicted us in all kinds of ways. But I remain most confident that His Majesty will turn to the defense of his servants -- friars and nuns and that the snares the devil has laid in that house will be discovered, and that the glorious St. Joseph will bring the truth to light and make known the caliber of those nuns that went to Seville from up here. I don't know the ones who entered down there, but I know they are given more credit by the one who deals with them, which has been most harmful in many ways.
7. I beg you for the love of our Lord not to abandon the nuns and to help them with your prayers in this tribulation, for they have only God and they have no one on earth to console them. But His Majesty who knows them will support them and give you the charity to do the same.
8. The enclosed letter I am sending unsealed so that if they have been given orders to hand over to the provincial any letters they receive from me, you can have someone read it to them, for it might afford them some relief to see my handwriting. It is thought that the provincial was wanting to expel them from the monastery; the novices were desiring to go with them.
9. What I have come to realize is that the devil cannot bear that either the discalced friars or discalced nuns be in Seville, and so he wages war against them. But I trust in the Lord that this effort will be of little benefit to the devil. Consider all that you have done to sustain the nuns there. Now when they are in their greatest need, give a helping hand to the glorious St. Joseph.
10. May it please the divine Majesty to preserve you very many years for the protection of the poor, for I know the favor you have shown those poor discalced fathers. May he give you the increase of holiness that I always beg of him for you, amen.
Today is the last day of January.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
If it doesn't tire you, you are welcome to read the enclosed letter that is for the sisters.
