1. In view of the desire we have to negotiate, I wouldn't want us to offer to do anything that we cannot easily carry out. It is also necessary to consider whether it would be wise to found a house in Rome, even though now the situation is favorable, or wait until we are stronger. For if those living there, being so near to the pope, become hostile toward the discalced friars -- and they will, because goodness is offensive where faults exist -- a war terrible for everyone would result. But if you should send the letter to the king's canon, your reverences should let him know whom you intend to name as provincial. In the brief they singled out some who, allowing for a few exceptions, I believe, don't know anything. It would be a real trial if they should perhaps choose one of these.
2. For the time being I would not want you to undertake this journey so that those here who are being punished are not left without the help of anyone and it doesn't seem necessary since everything there seems to be in good order. If you should have to go, it would be more fitting to wait and go for the general chapter, since it will be the duty of the provincial to go -- that is, if God should want you to be elected. If those who go now are waiting for you, you could represent us as our delegates and free us from our embarrassment.
May our Lord direct everything to his greater glory and guard you with an increase of holiness.
3. I don't have time to tell you more. Thus you won't have to be suffering further annoyance over so many things that are true. I fear that they will let Padre Mariano go without a sentence, for God sees that he is weak. May we be given the strength to die for His Majesty; certainly this brawl has come from his mercy.
Today is 10 February.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
4. But what a letter this is, so characteristic of an old woman with little humility and full of advice! May it please God that some of it be correct; if it isn't, that we still be friends.
