For mi padre, Paul, in Elijah's cave.
1. Jesus be with your paternity, mi padre. I had already written this letter when I received those you sent me. I hope our Lord has given you as happy an Easter as I desired and his daughters begged for him.
2. God be blessed that our business affairs are so progressing that the separation will soon end and poor Angela will be able to confer about her soul. For since your absence she has not been able to speak to anyone about anything that might bring her relief. Truly, our afflictions nonetheless have taken up all our attention. It seems to me that you have borne the greater part, since our Lord has so quickly repaid you by the fact that you have been of benefit to so many souls.
3. Señora Doña Juana has now written me a letter concerning the matter of our sister, María de San José. She never mentioned you. Although she said she was writing in haste, that was not enough to keep me from complaining about it. I wrote to the prioress of Valladolid that Sr. María should make her profession when she has completed her year. The prioress answered that the thought of delaying the profession had never entered her mind until I told her to wait. Truly, it seemed to me that a delay would matter little if it meant that you would be able to attend. But it is better now not to delay, since we have such solid hope of becoming a province, and I agree with you that all will go well.
4. My brother kisses your hands, and little Teresa is very content and as much a little child as ever.
5. I feel some relief about matters in Seville, now that the calced friars have no authority over the nuns. The archbishop wrote me that the discalced friars were very distressed until the nuncio's decisions arrived; now they are very happy. They are confessors to the nuns, and Fr. Vicar, Fray Angel, says that in a month Nicolao will return there, and María de San José's voice and standing will be restored and there will be an election.
6. From the letters that Padre Nicolao writes me, I gather that he is very prudent and will be of benefit to the order. Before leaving, he will come to see me. This is necessary so that he will better understand what has happened there and I can give him some advice to give to María de San José in the event that she is reelected. Garciálvarez no longer goes there. He says the archbishop forbade him to. May God take care of everything and be pleased to allow me to speak at leisure with you about many things. I understand that all is going very well for you with Padre José. That is what is important.
7. I'm amused to learn that now you are again wanting trials. Leave us alone for a while, for the love of God, for you don't suffer them alone. Let's rest for a few days. I well understand that trials are the kind of food that when really tasted will make one understand that there can be no better sustenance for the soul. But since I do not know whether they will involve others besides myself, I cannot desire them. I mean to say that there must be a great difference between suffering ourselves and seeing our neighbor suffering. This is a disagreement we have that needs clarifying when we meet.
8. May it please our Lord that we succeed in serving him in whatever way he desires. And may he keep you many years in the holiness I beg him to grant you, amen.
9. I wrote to Valladolid that there was no reason for them to write to Señora Doña Juana about covering the dowry since she doesn't have to give it until after the profession, and even then not for certain. And I said that since her daughter was received without a dowry the nuns shouldn't even talk about the matter, for in other places the nuns would lift their hands to God in thanksgiving. I didn't want to speak of anything else, and I sent the prioress the letter you sent to Señora Doña Juana. So for now everything is settled. I wouldn't want her to say a word about this to Padre Angel, for there is no reason to and it wouldn't be necessary, even though she is his good friend. You know how these friendships can come to a quick end; such is the world. I think you brought me to understand this in one of your letters; although you may not have done so with this in mind. Nonetheless, you might advise her about this, and remain with God.
10. Do not forget to recommend me to His Majesty along with all the other souls you keep in mind, for you know that you have to render God an account for mine.
Today is the last day of the Easter feasts.
Your unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
11. Write to Señora Doña Juana about when the profession will take place, for I don't have time to write her now. I am so afraid to write in this regard that I am not doing so, and will do so as little as possible. I have already answered my daughter María de San José. It would be a great comfort to have her with me. But our Lord is not disposed to give me any.
