1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. I hope that this Pentecost has brought you so many of his gifts and blessings that through them you may render His Majesty the service you owe him for having willed to come to the aid of his people, at so great a cost to yourself. May he be praised for everything. Certainly there is a great deal to reflect on and write about regarding this whole story.
2. Although I don't know all the details of how it was brought to a conclusion, I understand that everything went very well. At least, if the Lord allows us to become a province, nothing will ever have been done in Spain with so much inquiry and authorization. This must mean that the Lord wants the discalced friars for more purposes than we imagine. May it please His Majesty to keep Paul for many years that he may place his effort and find his joy in this work; I will be watching from heaven, if I am worthy to go there.
3. They have already brought the promissory letter from Valladolid. I am delighted to send this money. May the Lord so ordain that the matter will be concluded quickly. Even though the superior we have now is very good, something else is needed for us to be properly established, and, after all, he is only on loan to us.
4. In this letter of his, you will see what is being arranged for this poor little old woman. From certain indications one can suspect that the desire my calced brothers have to see me far away from here is greater than the need in Malagón. This caused me a little distress. But the rest didn't stir any emotions, not even in their first movements -- I mean going to Malagón -- although going there to be prioress bothers me, for I am not suited for that, and I fear failing in the service of our Lord. Beseech him that I might be without flaw, and as for the rest let whatever comes come, for the greater the trial, the greater the gain. In any case, tear up this letter at once.
5. It is a great consolation for me that you are feeling so well, but I don't like seeing you there in that heat. Oh, how each day adds to the loneliness of my soul at seeing you so far away -- although it seems to be always near Padre José. In this way one passes through life well, without earthly consolation, yet continually consoled. It seems you are no longer of this earth, since the Lord has withdrawn the occasions of your becoming attached to it and filled your hands with what keeps you in heaven. Truly, the more I think about this storm and the means the Lord has taken, the more stupefied I become. And if he be pleased that those Andalusians make some amends, I would consider it a special favor that he help them through the hands of someone else, since it was not in you to rule with the strong hand required for their good. And their good is what I have always desired. I was pleased with what Padre Nicolao writes me in this regard, so I am sending his letter to you.
6. All the sisters here ask for your prayers. They are distressed at the thought that I must go away. I will keep you informed. Pray hard for me to the Lord, out of charity. You will surely remember how they criticize my goings about, and who is the source of their criticisms. What a life! But it doesn't matter.
7. I have written to Father Vicar about the drawbacks to my being prioress, my not being always able to follow the community acts and other reasons. The truth is that I would feel no pain even if I had to go to the ends of the earth as long as it were out of obedience. In fact, I believe that the greater the trial, the greater my joy would be in doing at least some little thing for this great God to whom I am so indebted. I especially believe that he is served more when something is done only out of obedience. With my Paul it is enough to know that I am pleasing him for me to do something with joy. I could speak of many things that would bring me joy, but I fear putting them in letters, especially in matters of the soul.
8. That you may have a few laughs, I am sending you these couplets from the Incarnation, although the situation of that house is rather something to cry over. The poor sisters are trying to distract themselves. They will feel very sad over my going away, for they still have hope, and I do too, that a way to help that house can be found.
9. The nuns in Valladolid have very willingly given the two hundred ducats, and the prioress has also. If she hadn't had it, she would have gone looking for it. And she is sending a promissory letter for the entire four hundred ducats. I have greatly appreciated this, for truly she stores up all she can for her own house. But what a letter I wrote to her!
10. I was amused at how well Señora Juana knows the prioress -- I was amazed. She writes me that she is somewhat afraid of her, for she has given the money without telling her about it. And truly, as for what regards Sister María de San José, I've always seen that the prioress is very nice to her. For, after all, this shows the goodwill she feels toward you.
11. My regards to Father Rector, and the same to the padre who wrote me the other day.
Yesterday was the last day of the Easter season. Mine has not yet arrived.
Your paternity's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
