1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. Today, the feast of Corpus Christi, Padre Vicario, Fray Angel, sent me the enclosed letter for your reverence and an order under precept of obedience that I go to your house. Please God it wasn't a scheme of yours, for I am told that Señor Luis Manrique asked this of you. But if I can do something to help bring you rest, I will gladly do it, and would be willing to go at once. But he wants me to go to Valladolid first. He must not have been able to avoid it, for I certainly did not contribute to the idea. In fact (between you and me), I did what I reasonably could so as not to go, for I thought that at this time my going there could be avoided. But the one who stands in the place of God understands better than I what is suitable.
2. He says that I should stay there just a short time, but however short, I will be there during the coming month, and hope that, please God, the time will be long enough. It doesn't seem to me that this delay will matter much as regards your concerns. You must keep this secret from Pedro de la Banda; otherwise he will kill us with his contracts, while what most suits us is to have none. If some need arises, you can write to me in Valladolid.
3. The letters did not arrive, but the student's father is going around looking for him. Don't be disturbed, for now I am setting out for a place close to where Padre Baltasar Alvarez is. They tell me that the bishop in that place is feeling well again, which made me happy.
4. Tell Sister Isabel de Jesús that I am very sorry about her illness. I wrote to the prioress in Segovia to tell Señor Andrés de Jimena that if he wants to talk with me he should come here quickly; I don't know what he will do. Father Vicar tells me that he is giving me permission to enter into contracts. My desire is that he not fail to come. We will not have disagreements, with the Lord's help, for I desire very much to please and serve him.
5. Tell my Isabel de Jesús that I wouldn't want to find her in a weak state. Her bodily health is what I desire, for I am content with that of her soul. Tell her this. The messenger is waiting and so I cannot say more than may God watch over you, and regards to all the sisters.
Today is the feast of Corpus Christi.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
