1. Jesus be with your reverence. However great my hurry to send this messenger on, it is late because today is Sunday. I was also delayed a little because Padre Nicolao just arrived. I was delighted to see him.
2. I am now going to send your letter to Father Vicar. I am writing myself to his paternity listing the advantages or reasons there seem to be for him to give the permission; and I am telling him why Ana de Jesús was not accepted there. Understand that I am always fearful of much money, although the things they tell me about this young woman make me think that God is drawing her. Please God, this will be for his service, amen. Give her my best regards and tell her I am happy that I will be able to see her so soon. The illness of Doña María has grieved me very much. May God give her health, which is what I am begging of him, for I certainly see how much I care for her now that I am without her.
3. You must know that on the feast of Corpus Christi our Father Vicar sent me a command to go to your house. There were many censures in the bishop's orders lest the vicar would resist carrying out well what the bishop wanted him to do. So, I suppose I will be leaving here a day or two after the feast of St. John.
4. In your charity, forward to me in Medina a letter that our Father Vicar will send you, for it is necessary that I see it there. And tell them not to prepare for my arrival with any noisy reception, and I ask the same of you, for I tell you definitely that such receptions mortify me instead of making me happy. This is really true, for within myself I become upset to see how little I deserve all the attention; and the bigger the fuss, the more upset I become. See that they don't do anything special if they don't want to greatly mortify me.
5. Regarding the other things you wrote about, I am not going to say anything because, with God's favor, I will be seeing you soon. I'll stop off in Medina no more than three or four days, since I'll be returning there on my way to Salamanca. This is in accord with the orders of Father Vicar; and he does not want me to stay long in Valladolid.
6. Inform Doña María and the Lord Bishop about what is happening. They are right to be glad that our Father Vicar has received this task, for naturally he desires to be at their service. And so he broke through all the obstacles to my making this trip -- for he encountered many; and your desires, too, are being met. May God forgive you. Ask God that my journey will be for your benefit and that you not be so bent on having your own way. To me this sounds impossible, but God can do all things. May His Majesty make you as good as I beg of him, amen.
7. I haven't given your regards to the sisters yet. As for the Casilda business, don't do anything until I get there. And when we know what her mother is going to do, we will give a report to Father Vicar. Since her tertian fevers are mild, do not be distressed. Give my regards to all the sisters.
Today is Sunday within the octave of the feast of the Blessed Sacrament.
This messenger arrived at 5 o'clock this morning; we are going to send him on his way around noon today.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
