1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. After I wrote you, the licentiate Godoy came here, which seemed to me most opportune. We talked at length about his daughter, the nun. God has allowed that she be accepted in a Bernardine monastery -- I believe in Valderas. And so we agreed that when I go to Alba, I will investigate everything. If I then still think she is not meant to stay with us, he will bring her to this other monastery.
2. This delighted me, for I was bothered by it. From the information given me I think it better that she leave, and indeed necessary, lest by further delay the present opportunity be lost. Her father is bearing all this like a good Christian. In addition, the other day he had an attack of high tertian fevers. Although they are not harmful, he is in agony. Pray for him.
3. You should know that the abbot here is a good friend of the Bishop of Palencia. I also spoke with him, and he was very affable. There is as well a different vicar general. If God gives us the means, we will certainly obtain the license for San Alejo. The prioress is not well. She came here. She is very resolute. Having been close to death, she appointed the licentiate Godoy to be her executor and set up a solid basis for the negotiations. May His Majesty bring this foundation about, as he can, for I greatly desire it.
4. Sister María de San José is fine, and loved by everyone; she is a little saint, and so is Casilda. All the nuns beg for your prayers, as does Mother Prioress very much so. I am doing fairly well, and am happy to be here. I will do all I can to leave soon, for I am worried about the need in Salamanca. Nonetheless, I will be staying beyond this month.
5. I want to tell you about a temptation I had yesterday, and that is still going on, concerning Eliseo. It seems to me that he is sometimes careless in telling me the whole truth about everything. I know well that the matters are of little importance, but I would rather that he be more careful about this. Out of charity, urge him on my part to do this, for I don't think there can be complete perfection where negligence like this is present. Look at what I get involved in as if I had no other worries.
6. Take care to pray for me; I have much need of prayer. Remain with God, for I have written to a number of places and am tired.
Today is 18 July.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
7. My greetings to Father Rector and to Padre Fray Bartolomé. I ask you for the love of God to write me and let me know how your health is in this heat.
