To Lord Lorenzo de Cepeda, my lord.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. In a certain way the visit of that relative of ours here has tired me out. Such is life. And because we who by right ought to be so separated from the world have to pay all this respect to its proprieties, you shouldn't be surprised that although I have been here quite some time I have not spoken to my own sisters -- I mean privately -- even though some of them want very much to speak with me. There has not been time. And I am leaving, God willing, this coming Thursday. I will leave a letter for you, only a short one, so that the person who usually brings the money can bring the letter as well. He will also bring you three thousand reales, which they say are ready. This made me very happy. And he is bringing a beautiful chalice that couldn't be nicer. It's valued at twelve ducats and, I believe, one real. The workmanship is for forty reales. The entire amount comes to sixteen ducats minus three reales. It's all silver. I think you will be happy with it.
2. From those made of that metal you mention, they showed me one. Though not being very old and having been gilded, it already gives signs of what it is. It is turning black on the inside at the bottom, which is disgusting. I immediately resolved not to buy one like it. It seemed to me that for you to eat off silver and look for another metal for God would be intolerable. I didn't think I would find one costing so little for such a good size, but this bargain-hunter prioress through a friend arranged the purchase for this house. She sends you her regards, and because I am writing, she will not write. Her talent and the way she cares for this house is something to praise God for.
3. My health is the same as it was in Avila and even a little better. As for those around you, it is better to pretend you don't notice anything. It is preferable that the melancholia -- and it couldn't be anything else -- manifest itself in this form rather than in some worse form. I am happy that Avila has not died. After all, since he is well-intentioned, God has granted him the grace to take sick in a place where he has been so carefully cared for.
4. I am not surprised by your trouble, but I am surprised that you have such desire to serve God and at the same time find so light a cross so heavy. You will at once say that it is for the purpose of serving God more that you do not want him living with you. Oh, brother, how we fail to understand ourselves, for a little self-love lies in everything.
5. Don't be surprised by Francisco's instability; that goes with his age. And you shouldn't think -- although this is a different matter -- that everyone must be as exact as you are in everything. Let us praise God that he doesn't have other vices.
6. I will stay in Medina three or four days at the most, and less than eight in Alba; it will take two days to go from Alba to Medina -- and then to Salamanca.
7. In this letter from Seville you will see that they reinstated the prioress in her office, which made me very happy. If you want to write to her, send the letter to me in Salamanca. I have already told her to remember to continue paying back the money they owe you since you need it; I will take care that they do so.
8. Fray Juan de Jesús has arrived in Rome.[ The negotiations here are going well. Montoya, the canonist who was carrying on our business for us in Rome, passed by on his way with the cardinal's hat for the Archbishop of Toledo. He won't be needed any more.
9. Go to see Señor Francisco de Salcedo, in your charity, and let him know how I am. I am delighted that he is better, to the point that he can say Mass. Please God he will recover completely. These sisters here are praying to His Majesty for him. May he be with you.
10. You can speak about anything with María de San Jerónimo, if you want. Sometimes I wish Teresa were here, especially when we walk through the garden. May God make her a saint, and you as well. Give my regards to Pedro de Ahumada.
11. Yesterday was the feast of St. Anne. I thought of you and how you are devoted to her and that you are going to build a chapel in her honor, or may have already done so, and I rejoiced.
Your honor's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
