1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. A short time ago I received a letter from Señora Doña Juana who awaits daily an end to the silence imposed on you. Please God that when this letter arrives the matters in Toledo and Medina will be taken care of.
2. Padre Fray Felipe fits perfectly. He has gone to the other extreme, not engaging in talk outside of confession. He is a very good man.
3. Oh, the rejoicing of the nuns in Medina when they were told you were no longer obliged to be silent. It's amazing, what you owe those nuns. A lay sister here has taken a hundred disciplines for you. It all should be of benefit to you in doing good for souls.
4. Yesterday they gave me this letter from Padre Nicolao. I was delighted that what he mentions can be done. At times I was worried about the Salamanca matter, but I didn't see any better thing, and now he has a great deal to attend to. Certainly he has to attend more to his own affairs than to those of others. I told Padre Nicolao in Toledo something about the disadvantages but not everything I know. A great good came out of this. I believe the Most Reverend Vicar General will do everything to improve our situation. Only one doubt remains, and it is that when the nuncio died, as you know, the powers that he had given were no longer considered valid. It would be a great trial to have to listen to different opinions in a matter so important. Tell me what you think, for I don't see any other obstacle. On the contrary, it would seem to be a gift from heaven if among ourselves we could organize everything, as he says there. May the Lord bring this about, as he can.
5. If everything does not come about as we desire, I wonder what good it is for Padre Nicolao to be waiting down there; our cause would be left abandoned. True, Velasco will do much, but nothing will be lost by his having help. Don't speak of this, however, lest they accuse you, when they do what they say they will, that you acted out of self-interest. It is necessary to proceed with caution in everything so as to remove any occasion for false accusations, especially while Methuselah continues in office. He strongly opposes me as regards Paul having an office; but one has to put up with that.
6. Another drawback comes to mind now: I am wondering whether you could be provincial while remaining in that other office. Although I don't think this is a question of great importance, it would amount to your having it all, and it would be good if Macario could be appointed provincial. And we would put an end to his discontent so that he could die in peace, since the desire to be provincial is at the root of his melancholy; and this little clique will end. And this could be a reasonable thing to do since he had been appointed before. By his having a superior he couldn't do any harm. Tell me, for goodness' sake, what you think about this, for it is a matter concerning the future; but even if it involved the present, there's no reason to be scrupulous about it.
7. In the enclosed letter from Fray Gabriel you will see the temptation he undergoes in my regard; yet I have not failed to write to him when I had a carrier. And notice what jealousy does, for he says there that from the letters of mine you have sent him he sees that I have not written him. I will be delighted when this letter arrives if that matter concerning you will have ended so that you can write to me at length.
8. I forgot to mention the duke and duchess. You should know that on New Year's Eve the duchess sent me a courier with the enclosed letter, and another one, only so as to have news of me. In what she says about you telling her that I cared more for the duke, I did not agree. I said that since you told me so many good things about him including the fact that he was a spiritual man, you must have misunderstood my response. But I added that only God did I love for himself and that I didn't see anything in her that would be a reason for my not loving her and that I owed her more love than I did the duke. I said it in a better way than this.
9. I think that book of which you say Padre Medina had a copy made is my long one. Tell me what you know about this. Don't forget for I would be very happy if it were not lost; there is no other copy but the one the angels have. In my opinion the one I wrote afterward is superior, even though Fray Domingo says it's not good; at least I had more experience at the time I wrote it.
10. I have already written to the duke twice and at greater length than you tell me to.
11. May God preserve you, for if something now were to make me happy, it would be to see Paul. If God doesn't will it, well and good; let him give me cross upon cross.
Beatriz sends her best regards.
Your unworthy servant and true daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
