1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. I don't know what our Lord intends by allowing so many obstacles to my departing and speaking with this angel.
2. So as to be able to leave, I wrote him today in the form of a request -- it was suggested that I do so, and we shall see what the result is. But another snag arose today, which is my fear that we will miss Padre Fray Angel on the journey. He wrote that after the feast days he would come to Madrid. If we finish our business with the archbishop, however, I don't think waiting for him would be reason enough to delay; so we will set out next Tuesday.
3. Padre Fray Antonio is now much better. He is saying Mass. And so you can be at ease, for I will speak with you there; and if not, we shall see each other in heaven. Padre Fray Antonio was in such a condition that I was afraid to go alone with him, thinking that he might die along the way. And since it would have made me happy for you to come, I tried to bring this about, still failing to realize that when I myself try to get something in this life the opposite happens. Since he was so sick, you had the occasion for coming to see him -- and it would have appeared right. It would be good to write to him and express your happiness over his recovery, for you have been cold toward him.
4. Padre Fray Hernando del Castillo is here. They said the Princess of Eboli was back in her house in Madrid; now they say she is in Pastrana. I don't know which is true; either of these is very good for her. My health is good, glory to God. Let me know as soon as Padre Fray Angel arrives there. These carriers deliver the letters quicker and more reliably. I have already written you two in which I told you that I had received Padre Nicolao's letter and those that came with it. The one dated the Tuesday before Corpus Christi was given to me today, Friday, the day after this feast.
5. I am answering you through Madre Brianda's brother; she is doing all right. All the nuns ask for your prayers; I ask for those of Señor Velasco. Since I wrote to him recently, I am not doing so now. I really hope the letter was not lost, for it is important that his sister be there when I pass through.
6. Padre Nicolao told me that he left eight hundred ducats on deposit in Seville, since the prioress wanted to have them on reserve for any need that would arise regarding the negotiations. I tell you this so that the person who lent you the hundred ducats may be sure of receiving them back soon. It will be enough for me to write to Casademonte, and he will send you the amount at once -- I mean if you cannot obtain a loan there. May God direct everything as he sees necessary, and watch over you as I beg of him.
Your paternity's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
7. Have this letter sent to Padre Nicolao and find out from the Carmel what they know about Padre Vicario; and if possible let me know, although I believe we will be leaving here on Tuesday or Wednesday -- unless something else comes up, for it seems a kind of spell has been cast over us.
