1. Jesus be with your ladyship. When they gave me your letter, I had already written the enclosed. I kiss your hands many times for your care in showing me kindness; this is nothing new. I had very poor health after I arrived here, but now I am all right. And since I have His Excellency present, all goes well, although the peace he brings me would be still greater if you were present; I would have the solace of speaking to you about many things. For a number of reasons I don't think this will be possible as soon as I thought.
2. You will be discussing all of this with Father Visitator, as was written to me, which makes me very happy. He is your devoted servant and I was consoled to observe how fondly he speaks of you, and so I believe that in everything he will do what you request. I beg you to show him every kindness and to convey that regard you usually have for such persons. He is the highest superior we now have, and his soul must merit much before the Lord.
3. As for accepting those nuns, I indeed see the kindness you are showing me. But since Padre Suárez, of the Society, writes to me and is the one they should speak to and learn from in matters concerning our order and the required dispositions, there is no reason for delay. They should seek permission from Father Provincial, and you should request him to receive them; otherwise, ask it of Father Visitator who will grant it immediately. I make out better with him than I do with our Father Provincial; however much I write to him, he doesn't want to answer me.
4. I am sorry about the illness of my lady abbess. May God be blessed because in one way or another you are never without a reason for being distressed. All of us here are praying for her, and for you as well. There is no need to ask this of me when I have such a good bell to awaken me, which is love. May it please our Lord that the illness not be serious and that you will soon be well. All the sisters here kiss your hands many times.
5. They have written me that you are deeply spiritual. This was nothing new to me. But I would be happy if I were closer and could delight -- were I not what I am -- in speaking of spiritual things with you. This Father Visitator brings me life, for I don't think he is deceived by me as are all others; God wishes to enlighten him about how miserable I am, and so he catches me in imperfections at every step. I am very consoled by this and seek to make them known to him. It is a great relief to be transparent before one who stands in the place of God. In this way I will benefit from the time I am with him.
6. You must already know that they want Fray Domingo to go to Trujillo, for they've elected him prior there. Those in Salamanca have petitioned their Father Provincial to leave him where he is. It is not known what the provincial will decide. The climate there would be hard on his health. When you see Father Provincial of the Dominicans, scold him for not coming to see me when he was in Salamanca, for he stayed there a good number of days. It's true that I do not have much love for him! This letter is going to end up tiring you out. I'm adding one other, no more. But since I am consoled by speaking with you, I wasn't being careful.
Your ladyship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
