1. May the Holy Spirit be always with your lordship, amen. I tell you that I cannot understand why these sisters and I delighted and rejoiced with such tender feeling in the favor you showed us with your letter. Although we receive many letters and are accustomed to receiving kindnesses and favors from persons of great merit, they don't move us the way all that comes from you does. It's a mysterious thing we do not understand. And this is a fact I have attentively observed in these sisters and myself.
2. We have only an hour to respond, and in my opinion we would need many hours, for they are anxious to do what you ask of them, and your godmother has the idea in mind that her words must be efficacious. If their effect were to be in conformity with the affection with which she utters them, I am truly certain that they would be beneficial. But this is a matter for our Lord, and only His Majesty can move hearts. It is a great favor he does us in giving you both good desires and insight into things, for in so great a mind it is impossible that God not bring these two about little by little. I can truthfully say that apart from the business that concerns the bishop, I do not now know anything else that gives my soul more joy than to see you master of yourself. Truly I have thought that only God can fulfill the desires of so courageous a person. And so His Majesty has done well in allowing that on earth you be overlooked by those who could have begun to satisfy some of those desires. You must pardon me, for I am sounding foolish. But how true it is of the boldest and most miserable people that when you give them a little help they want a great deal more.
3. Padre Fray Gracián was delighted with your message, for I know of his love for you and that he has the desire to serve you whom he is obligated to -- and I believe even more so in your case. He recommends you to the prayers of the good persons with whom he deals. And he does so with such desire to help you that I hope in His Majesty these prayers will be heard. He told me one day that your being very good would not satisfy him but that he wants you to be very holy. My thoughts are lowlier. I would be happy if you were satisfied only with what is necessary for yourself and not extend your charity so much that you are trying to get things for others, and I see that if you took into account only your own repose, you could find it and become occupied in acquiring perpetual goods and serve the one who will keep you with him forever and never tire of bestowing his blessings on you.
4. We already knew when the feast of the saint you mention occurs. We have all agreed to receive Communion on that day for you and thereby settle our debt. We will celebrate that day with joy and in your honor, doing so as best we can. Through the other favors you have done for me, I have seen that I can ask you for many things if I have the need. But our Lord knows that the greatest favor you can grant me is to be where you cannot give me any of those of which you speak, even if you want to. Nonetheless, when I see myself in need I will turn to you as the lord of this house.
5. I am hearing about the effort María, Isabel, and your godmother are exerting in writing to you. As for Isabelita (de San Judas), since she is new, she is keeping quiet; I don't know what she will say. I am determined not to correct a word of theirs, so you must bear up with them since you ordered them to speak. Truly it is no small mortification to read foolishness, nor is it a small proof of your humility to be content with such miserable people! May our Lord make us resemble you so that you don't lose the fruit of this good work by our not knowing how to beg His Majesty to repay you.
Today is Sunday. I don't know if it is 20 August.
Your lordship's unworthy servant and true daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
