1. ... tired as I am, I find rest in writing to your reverence in my own hand.
2. Velasco sent you one letter, and Padre Nicolao sent another to Salamanca. I opened the latter consisting entirely of suggestions that arrived too late for the matter concerned, so I tore it up. Within it was one from Padre Gregorio in which he told you that he was leaving for Almodóvar to await the convocation of the chapter. He was afraid of leaving his house and going without permission. It made me sad. Tell me what you know about this and if they have found any trace of Fray Bartolomé de Jesús.
3. Father Vicar, Fray Angel, left here for Madrid about fifteen days ago. He left in a hurry. Since Methuselah is now stirring, I wouldn't want it to be against us. It would be nice to know their intentions as you have known them. I also received the note that came with my letter.
4. I wrote what precedes this yesterday. Today the mail came and with it definite news that although he is not dead, no hope remains that Padre Fray Pedro Fernández will live ...
5. I have a great desire to know how your trip to Seville went, especially when I think of the dangerous creeks. For the love of God, write to me through all possible means. They tell me the mail comes up here from down there. I will find out, but until I know for certain, I will not send this except through Señora Doña Juana de Antisco. Try to find out yourself and then write to me by that means. For all this is necessary in order that I get well completely, although I'm feeling well now since I'm writing such a long letter.
6. You should know that Padre Mariano wrote informing me of the important reason why Padre Macario should be provincial and that I should urge this. What a life! They are great friends. This changeableness frightens me. And I with each passing day become more opposed to this, while he pushes ahead with his usual zeal.
7. Remain with God, mi padre, and answer me about Palencia. May His Majesty grant you what I beg of him and repay you for your charity in writing to me so often after your departure, which was a good while ago.
Today is 8 November.
Your reverence's daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
8. Let me know when the fleet will be leaving, for I must write to Don Lorencio. And ask if there is any traveler going to Quito.
