For Mother Prioress of St. Joseph's in Seville.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter, amen. I long to know how your health is. For the love of God, take good care of it, for I worry much over this. Let me know how you feel and how consoled you now are to have our Padre Gracián with you. For it is a comfort to me to think of the relief you will find in having him there for everything. I am better, thanks be to God.
2. I am getting to feel like myself again, although there is no lack of something to suffer with my continual illnesses and cares, which are never wanting. Pray for me, and write to let me know what I should do about these documents you sent me; they're worth nothing for legally withdrawing money. See what can be done, and try to find some aspirant so as to pay the money needed to build the chapel my brother wanted, for one can no longer fail to begin the construction. I don't have any resources here, for which I am very sorry. I can't do anything more than entrust everything to God that he will provide, as he can.
3. As for the order's business affairs, there is nothing new to say for now. When there is something, you will hear of it from our Padre Gracián. My best regards to all the sisters. Please God they will enjoy the health I desire for them.
4. I have already written you that the one in Toledo who owes you the money is taking his time, and he is a judge for the archbishop. I don't know how anything can be collected from him except amicably. If Padre Nicolao, when he goes there, should want to stay a few days and inquire about the matter with him, perhaps something could be worked out. I had thought that something could be done about this once Francisco's plan to enter religious life was carried out. Everything is breaking down. May God work it out as he can and give you the health that I beg of him.
5. Since there is mail delivery to this city, don't fail to make use of it and write me, and tell our padre to do so, and let Mother Subprioress inform me about how the nuns are getting along with him, and if he is well, and tell her she should write me a long letter about everything so that you don't tire yourself.
6. For goodness' sake be on guard for there is someone in the house who thinks that what amounts to nothing is a serious matter. And let me know how this poor soul is doing, and how Father Prior of Las Cuevas is. Have our padre go to see him and give him my best wishes and also to Padre Rodrigálvarez, who made me happy with his message. My head doesn't permit me to write to him. Let me know how San Jerónimo is. My regards to her and to Sister San Francisco.
Today is the feast of the Presentation of Our Lady.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
All of you pray hard for the affairs of the order.
