1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your most illustrious lordship. I have been waiting for an answer to a letter of mine that must have been delivered to you during Holy Week or a little after that, according to what I was told. In it I asked you to grant me the favor of a license to found a monastery in Madrid, which you had previously told me would please you. But you did not give me the license at the time because of a certain obstacle, which our Lord has now removed. I don't know whether you remember and how you told me that once the barrier were gone you would grant me this favor. Considering this to be certain, I have been preparing some things for this foundation, since it will be easier to find a less expensive house before his majesty comes to Madrid.
2. At present I am in Soria where a monastery has been founded. The bishop of this place invited me to come to found it, and it has been established very well for the glory of God. I would not want to leave this town until you grant me this favor, for otherwise I would have to travel many leagues out of my way. And as I told you, there are some persons in that city waiting and suffering from the delay. Since you always help those who seek to serve our Lord and from what I understand he will be served by this work which will be most beneficial for this order -- I beg you not to delay any longer the bestowal of this favor, if it would please you to do so.
3. My lady, Doña Elena, continues steadfast in her purpose. But until the license comes from you, this is of little use. She is so holy and detached from everything that they tell me she would like to enter the monastery in Madrid, with the hope truly of seeing you some day. I am not surprised.
4. I too always have this desire to see you, and I take special care each day to pray to our Lord for you and to have the nuns in these monasteries do the same.
5. May it please him to hear us and preserve you for very many years with the increase of holiness that I beg of him, amen.
Written in Soria in this house of the Carmel of the Holy Trinity on 16 June.
Your most illustrious lordship's unworthy subject and servant,
Teresa of Jesus
