1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. Apart from the loneliness it makes me feel to have had no word of you for so long a time, it's painful for me not to know where you are. If something were to arise in which I would need your advice, this would cause problems, but even apart from that, such ignorance is hard for me to bear. Please God you are well. I am well and have become a grand prioress, as if I didn't have anything else to attend to. The notebooks are now done, and all the nuns are happy with them.
2. You should know that I told Ana de San Pedro's daughter that she should not consider herself a tacitly professed nun. She saw that I was determined that she should not make profession except in the mitigated rule, but that afterward she could stay here, for this was the agreement her mother and I came to; and that she would give a dowry here and another one at the Incarnation. The one who insisted most that she was not suited for here was her mother. The daughter felt this very much and says that she is willing for them to test her as many years as they want and that she will accept the confessors that they give her and that after that, if they want to send her away, she will leave willingly. Well, we have seen a turnabout that has amazed us all, although it hasn't been going on for long, not more than fifteen days.
3. All her trials of soul have disappeared and she goes about most joyfully. She is clearly happy and in good health. If this continues, one couldn't in conscience refuse her profession. I inquired of her and of her confessors and I am told that these anxieties were not normal for her, that she hadn't had them for more than a year and a half. Here they had given me to believe that she had always felt them, but I had never been here when she did. It seems also that she is more open. In your charity pray for her. Sometimes I have wondered if it isn't the devil who is making her wise, without all those anxieties, so as to deceive us and leave us afterward tormented by both her and her mother, although the mother is conducting herself well now. Her mother liked the idea about the Incarnation, and so did I.
4. The daughter would like to nullify the contract and give more to this monastery, and she asked me to allow her to speak to Doctor Castro; yet she didn't tell me why, but he told me. And he looked at the contract and says that it is very tightly drawn up. She asked for his opinion, and he didn't want to give it, but he told her that he was a friend both of the Theatines and of this house also and that he was on good terms with both, that she should ask someone else. I told him that there was no need to get into this, for we would not take her for the sake of her fortune but only if she were suited for the life here; nor would we send her away for such a reason if she were doing well. The truth is that I spoke with reserve.
5. Tell me who this man is and if he can be trusted, for his intelligence, charm, and manner of speech please me very much. I don't know whether that may be due to the fact that he is so close to you. He has come here a few times. One of the days, during the octave of All Saints, he will preach to us. He doesn't want to hear the confessions of anyone. But it seems to me that he would like to hear my confession, and what I suspect -- since in general he is adverse to hearing confessions -- is that his desire comes from his curiosity. They say that he is very much opposed to revelations, that he even says he doesn't believe those given to St. Bridget. He didn't say this to me but has said it to María de Cristo. If this occasion had arisen previously, I would have tried at once to discuss my soul with him, for I used to be drawn toward those who I knew had such opinions, thinking that they would be the ones who would free me from illusion if I were being deceived -- more so than others. Since I no longer have those fears, I don't feel this desire so much, but only a little. If I didn't have a confessor and it seemed all right to you, I would go to him. But I no longer seek guidance much from anyone, except my former confessors, since I am at peace.
6. I am enclosing a letter from Villanueva, for I felt distressed and sorry for that prioress who has to suffer so many trials on account of the subprioress. The situation is almost the same as at Malagón. The disturbance that these nuns with such humors bring to the peace of all the others is a terrible one, and thus I have such fear of allowing them to make profession. I so wish you would go to that house. And if the foundation is made in Granada, it wouldn't be a bad idea to bring her there with one or two lay sisters, for under the guidance of Anne of Jesus and in a larger house, they would get along better, and there would be friars in that place to hear their confessions. Despite everything, I think the house in Villanueva will continue making progress, for there are good souls in the community. And even if they accept two postulants who are relatives of the parish priest, as he desires, things will work out very well if they are given what they should be given.
7. Nicolao desires very much that you go to Seville, and the reason is for what his brother tells him, and it must be of some importance. I have already written him of how well the nuns there are doing, for I received a letter from the prioress. I already wrote him that it wasn't possible for you to leave Salamanca.
8. Here I ruled that when someone is sick the nuns should not visit her together, but one at a time, unless the sickness is of a kind that requires some other procedure. There are many drawbacks to having a number of nuns congregating together, for we are few in number, and this can sometimes lead to gossiping. If you think it would be good, make this a rule there too; and if not, let me know.
9. Oh, mi padre, how difficult Julián is being! He is incapable of refusing to allow Mariana to see him every time she wants, but he even asks her to come and see him. With him everything is holy; but God deliver us from confessors who are up in years. It would be a good thing if this practice were uprooted. What would happen if we were not dealing with such good souls? After having written this letter, I went through certain things here with one of the sisters that displeased me very much, which is why I mentioned this, for I had not thought of speaking about it. The remedy will be to take the two away from here if the foundation is made in Madrid. Although it is holy, I cannot put up with it. May God make you what I beg of him and watch over you for us.
Today is the vigil of St. Vincent; tomorrow the vigil of the two apostles.
Your reverence's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
10. According to what the prioress of Toledo writes me, the one who is bringing this letter will ask me tomorrow to petition you to give him the habit. This I am doing now. Give orders wherever you are that the prayers for the deceased be said for María Magdalena, whom the good Lord took, as you will see from the enclosed letter -- and inform all the monasteries.
