1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. I was amused by the loud complaining of all of you about our Father Provincial and your neglect to keep him informed after the first letter in which you told him that you had made the foundation. And you all acted in the same way with me.
2. Father Provincial was here on the day of the Cross, and he didn't know anything more than what I told him, which came through a letter that the prioress in Seville sent me, in which she said that you bought a house for 12,000 ducats. Where there was so much prosperity, it is not surprising that the patent letters were strictly worded. But down there you're so crafty at not obeying that this latest fact pained me in no small way because of the bad impression it will make in the whole order and also because of the custom that may result by which prioresses will feel independent and will also think up excuses. And since you esteem your hosts so highly, it has been a great indiscretion to stay there with so many nuns. You sent back those poor nuns as soon as they arrived, making them retrace so many leagues -- I don't know how you had the heart to do this. Those who came from Beas could have returned there and others with them. It was terribly impolite to stay in that house with so many -- especially knowing that you were a bother; and inconsiderate to bring so many from Beas knowing that you did not have your own house. Certainly I am amazed at the patience of your hosts. Mistakes were made from the beginning, and since you have no other solution than the one you mention, it will be good for you to try it before you end up with greater scandal, seeing that you hold that it would be scandalous to allow one more sister to enter the community. For so large a city this seems a trifle to me.
3. I laughed to myself over the fear you wished to create in us that the archbishop will suppress the monastery. He no longer has anything to do with it, I don't know why you give him such a large role to play. He would die before succeeding. And if the monastery should continue, as is now the case, by introducing into the order principles that show little obedience, it would be much better if it didn't last. Our worth will not come from having many monasteries but in having nuns in them who are saints.
4. I don't know when these letters that have now come for our padre can be given to him. I fear that he won't be here for another month and a half, and then I don't know where I can be certain in sending them. He went to Soria from here and from there to many places on visitations. Nothing is known for certain where he will be or when we will have news of him. As I figure it, he will be in Villanueva when the poor nuns arrive. It's very painful for me to think of what he will have to go through when they arrive, and the gossip. The place is so small that nothing is secret, and much harm will be done at the sight of such foolishness. They could have been sent to Beas until informing him. They didn't even have a license to return there for he had already officially made them conventuals in Granada, and they were returning right under his eyes. There must have been some way in which the matter could have been remedied, so the fault is all yours for not having mentioned the number of nuns you were bringing from Beas and whether you included any lay Sister. You paid no more heed to our padre than you would have if he hadn't received the office of superior.
5. From what he has told me and considering what he has to do, it will be impossible for him to go there before winter. Please God, Father Vicar Provincial will be able to do it, for they just gave me some letters from Seville, and the prioress writes me that he is struck down by the plague that's afflicting them there -- although it's being kept secret -- and Fray Bartolomé de Jesús also, which saddened me very much. If you haven't learned of this, pray for them; losing them would mean a great loss for the order. On the envelope of the letter someone wrote that Father Vicar is better, although not out of danger. The nuns are very tired and understandably, since they are martyrs in that house and undergo many more trials than you -- although they don't complain as much. Where the nuns are healthy and there is food to eat, being a little crowded won't kill them, especially where they have the support of many sermons. I don't know what the complaining is about, for everything doesn't have to be in perfect shape.
6. Madre Beatriz de Jesús tells Father Provincial that they are waiting for Father Vicar to send the nuns from Beas and Seville back to their houses. The nuns in Seville do not agree with this idea. Besides, Seville is very far and in no way would this be proper. If the need is so great, our padre will see to the matter. Regarding those from Beas, it would be indeed the right thing to do. If it were not for my fear of contributing to an offense against God through disobedience, I would send you an explicit order, for in all that regards the discalced nuns I stand in the place of our Father Provincial.
7. In virtue of this authority I tell you and order you that as soon as it can be arranged you send back the nuns that came there from Beas with the exception of Mother Prioress, Anne of Jesus. And this should be done even if you have moved into your own house; at least if you have not a good income that will free you from the straits you're now in. For no reason is it good to have so many nuns living together at the beginning of a foundation, whereas this may be appropriate in other situations.
8. I have prayed to our Lord over this matter during these days -- for I didn't want to answer the letters at once -- and I find that by your doing things this way, His Majesty will be served, and the more you suffer from this the more you will serve him. For any kind of attachment, even to the superior, is very foreign to the spirit of discalced nuns, nor would they ever grow spiritually in this way. God wants his brides to be free, attached only to him; and I don't want them to begin acting in this house as they did in Beas. I never forget the letter they wrote me from there when you left office, for a calced nun would not even have written it. This is how cliques begin and many other unfortunate things, although they may not be recognized at the beginning. And for this time, don't follow any opinion but mine, for heaven's sake. For once things are settled and the sisters more detached, they can return if it is fitting.
9. I truly don't know who they are who went, for you kept it really secret from me and from our padre, nor did I think you would take so many nuns from there, but I imagine they are very attached to you. Oh, true spirit of obedience, how when seeing someone in the place of God no repugnance is felt toward loving her! For the sake of God I beg you to take care to inspire souls to be brides of the Crucified, that they crucify themselves by renouncing their own will and the pursuit of childish trifles. Look, this is the beginning in a new kingdom, and you and the other nuns are more obliged to behave as valiant men and not as worthless little women.
10. What is this, madre mía, that you are paying attention to whether Father Provincial calls you presider, or prioress, or Anne of Jesus? It is clear that if you were not in charge, he wouldn't have reason to give you a title above the others, for they have also been prioresses. You have given him so little news of what is taking place that he doesn't know whether elections have been held or not. Certainly, I am ashamed that in so short a time the discalced nuns are paying attention to these trivialities, and after paying attention to them, making them the topic of their conversations, and that Madre María de Cristo makes such an issue out of it. Either through trials you have all become silly or the devil has introduced hellish notions into this order. And after this she praises you as being very courageous as though acting differently would mean you were not. God desires my discalced nuns to be very humble, obedient, and submissive, for all these other kinds of courage mark the beginning of many imperfections without these virtues.
11. Now I recall that in one of your previous letters you wrote that one of the nuns had relatives there who would be helpful if brought with you from Beas. If this is so, I leave it to the prioress to make the decision, but not the others.
12. I truly believe that you will have many sufferings in the beginning. Do not be surprised, for a work as great as this cannot be done without them since, as they say, the recompense will be great. Please God that the imperfections with which I am doing this do not deserve more punishment than reward, for I always have this fear. I am writing to the prioress of Beas to help with the expenses of the journey. You are so short of means there! I assure you that if Avila were closer, I would be very happy to take back my sisters. That could happen with the passing of time and the help of the Lord. So you can say that once the foundation is made and there is no longer a need there, because nuns will be entering from that area, they may return to the houses from which they came.
13. A little while ago I wrote at length to you and to those madres, and to Padre Fray John, and gave you an account of what has been taking place here, and so it seems that I need to write nothing further than what is in that letter, which was meant for everyone. Please God, things being as they are, you will not be offended as when our padre called you "presider." Until we had an election here, when our padre came, this is the term we used, and not "prioress," and it's all the same.
14. Each time I forget to mention this. They told me that in Beas even after the chapter, the nuns were leaving the enclosure to clean the church. I don't know how they can do that since not even the provincial can give permission for this. The prohibition comes from the pope's motu proprio, with severe threats of excommunication, not to speak of the strict prescription of our constitutions. At the beginning this was difficult for us; now we are delighted with it. The Sisters in Avila know well that they cannot even go out to lock the door that opens onto the street. I don't know why you were not informed of this. You should take care of this matter, for goodness' sake. God will provide someone to clean the church and there is a solution to everything ...
15. Every time I think of the crowded conditions in which you have placed your noble hosts, I cannot help but feel bad. I already wrote the other day that you should get a house even if it is not very good or suitable, for you will not be as crowded as you are now, and even if you are it is better that you suffer than to make those who have been so good to you suffer. I am now writing to Señora Doña Ana,b
 and I would like to have words to thank her for the good she has done us. She will not lose anything with our Lord, which is what matters.
16. If you want something from our padre, remember that you have not written to him. For, as I say, it will be late before I can send him letters. I will try. From Villanueva he will be going to Daimiel to receive that monastery, and to Malagón and Toledo; then to Salamanca and Alba, for the elections of I don't know how many prioresses. He told me that he didn't plan to be in Toledo until August. It distresses me to see him have to do so much traveling in places where the weather is so hot. All of you pray for him and try as much as you can to get your own house ...
17. The Sisters could stay there until you have notified the provincial and he decides what the best thing to do might be, for you haven't kept him abreast of anything or written him to tell him the reason you are not taking those nuns.
May God give us light -- for without that, there is little one can be sure of -- and watch over your reverence, amen.
Today is the thirtieth of May.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
18. I am writing to Mother Prioress in Beas about the departure of those nuns and that this should be done with as much secrecy as possible. When it comes to be known, it won't matter. Let Mother Subprioress, her two companions, and Padre Fray John of the Cross read this letter addressed to you, for I don't have the head to be writing more.
