For Our Father Provincial.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, mi padre. I still do not have an answer to the letters I sent you with a private messenger, and I desire a response very much so as to know how your health is. It has been somewhat comforting to me that so far we have had continually cold weather here. I hope that it will not be as hot down there as usual. May God do what he sees as necessary. I hold that it is taxing for you to be traveling about in this weather, so it would be a relief for us to have more frequent news of you. I have a strong desire that you not delay there and that the thought not even enter your mind to go to Seville, whatever may be the need, for they are definitely undergoing a pestilence down there.
2. For the love of our Lord, do not give in to the temptation to go and ruin us all, at least me. Although God gives you health, the danger you place your health in is enough to take mine away up here ...
Finding the money to pay the expenses will be no small task, for she wants everything to be perfect and her brother will not give anything for now. Behold the nice seasoning to go with the poverty in which we are all walking! If you find anyone in Malagón who will lend us five hundred ducats -- I mean to say, if the prioress should have them -- I would accept them gladly, since that is not much for so many nuns. The main thing is that here, mi padre, I don't think they will ever be in need. For now, there will be some struggle.
3. As for finding someone to say Mass for us, we haven't succeeded. It will be necessary for now -- and all our friends think so -- to have a friar come. Since you had the same idea in your letter, we were all very happy. I don't find anyone like Fray Felipe, for I know that he is very distressed there and doesn't do anything but send me letters. As a result he cannot be kept there much longer in so unhappy a state. If he comes here, we will have a confessor, and he will be better off than down there ...
4. You should know, mi padre, that the prioress in Toledo writes me that she is very ill, and indeed it is for me a matter of conscience because of what she endures there, for truly the climate is killing her. I have thought, if you agree, that even though they elected her there -- for if they hadn't it would be strange -- you could bring her to Avila. That way two things could be done: first, test her health; second, she could leave a president there of her own choice, and one could see how that one does without being a prioress. It would be a difficult burden for Avila if she is so sick, but also if she is well it would be very beneficial. And accepting her is something they owe her, for every year since St. Joseph's was founded eight hundred ducats are given for her. There are many difficulties in this regard, but she has worked hard within the order, and I couldn't bear just leaving her to die.
5. You will see there what is best; and realize that she has been tempted to think that you don't like her, and the letter that you wrote her about not touching the money made her think that you consider her to be a spendthrift. I have already written to her about your aim for them, which is that they have an income and little by little build a chapel.
6. These nuns can be a burden for you, mi padre; but you are indeed indebted to them, for they have deeply felt your trials, especially in Toledo...
7. ... if it isn't acquired by the fixed date, we are left without knowing what to do about the monastery, and the danger is great that they will spend what they have for buying one. In sum I have written to them not to turn away Cristóbal Juárez until you get there, for you will see from everything what is best to do. The walls are almost finished. Only one is made of clay; the others are of lime and stone.
8. May God watch over you for me. I wouldn't want to ever end this. My throat feels as usual, and no worse. Otherwise, I am fine and everything is going well, glory to God. Don't let this sadden you, for because of what I owe His Majesty and the favors he grants me each day, it is good to suffer something.
9. I beg you to give heed to this matter about the friar. And if you can't send the one mentioned, send another you might think good for this office, for these souls are very good and tranquil.
Today is 25 June. Yesterday was the feast of St. John. The friends are well.
Your reverence's servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
