CHAPTER 18
 
Discusses the fourth degree of prayer. Begins to offer an excellent explanation of the great dignity the Lord bestows upon the soul in this state. Gives much encouragement to those who engage in prayer that they might strive to attain so high a stage since it can be reached on earth, although not by merit but through God's goodness. This should be read attentively, for the explanation is presented in a very subtle way and there are many noteworthy things.
 
1. May the Lord teach me the words necessary for explaining something about the fourth water. Clearly His favor is necessary, even more so than for what was explained previously. In the previous prayer, since the soul was conscious of the world, it did not feel that it was totally dead -- for we can speak of this last prayer in such a way. But, as I said, the soul has its senses by which it feels its solitude and understands that it is in the world; and it uses exterior things to make known what it feels, even though this may be through signs.
In all the prayer and modes of prayer that were explained, the gardener does some work, even though in these latter modes the work is accompanied by so much glory and consolation for the soul that it would never want to abandon this prayer. As a result, the prayer is not experienced as work but as glory. In this fourth water the soul isn't in possession of its senses, but it rejoices without understanding what it is rejoicing in. It understands that it is enjoying a good in which are gathered together all goods, but this good is incomprehensible. All the senses are occupied in this joy in such a way that none is free to be taken up with any other exterior or interior thing.
In the previous degrees, the senses are given freedom to show some signs of the great joy they feel. Here in this fourth water the soul rejoices incomparably more; but it can show much less since no power remains in the body, nor does the soul have any power to communicate its joy. At such a time, everything would be a great obstacle and a torment and a hindrance to its repose. And I say that if this prayer is the union of all the faculties, the soul is unable to communicate its joy even though it may desire to do so -- I mean while being in the prayer. And if it were able then this wouldn't be union.
2. How this prayer they call union comes about and what it is, I don't know how to explain. These matters are expounded in mystical theology; I wouldn't know the proper vocabulary. Neither do I understand what the mind is; nor do I know how it differs from the soul or the spirit. It all seems to be the same thing to me, although the soul sometimes goes forth from itself. The way this happens is comparable to what happens when a fire is burning and flaming, and it sometimes becomes a forceful blaze. The flame then shoots very high above the fire, but the flame is not by that reason something different from the fire but the same flame that is in the fire. Your Reverence with your learning will understand this, for I don't know what else to say.
3. What I'm attempting to explain is what the soul feels when it is in this divine union. What union is we already know since it means that two separate things become one. O my Lord, how good You are! May You be blessed forever! May all things praise You, my God, for You have so loved us that we can truthfully speak of this communication which You engage in with souls even in our exile! And even in the case of those who are good, this still shows great generosity and magnanimity. In fact, it is Your communication, my Lord; and You give it in the manner of who You are. O infinite Largess, how magnificent are Your works! It frightens those whose intellects are not occupied with things of the earth that they have no intellect by which they can understand divine truths. That You bestow such sovereign favors on souls that have offended You so much certainly brings my intellect to a halt; and when I begin to think about this, I'm unable to continue. Where can the intellect go that would not be a turning back since it doesn't know how to give You thanks for such great favors? Sometimes I find it a remedy to speak absurdities.
4. After I have just received these favors or when God is beginning to give them to me (for at the time one is receiving them as I have already mentioned there's no power to do anything), it often happens that I say:
Lord, look what You are doing. Don't forget so quickly my great wickedness. Now that in order to pardon me You have forgotten it, I beseech You to remember it that You might put a limit on Your favors. Don't, my Creator, pour such precious liqueur in so broken a bottle; You have already seen at other times how I only spill and waste it. Don't place a treasure like this in a place where cupidity for life's consolations is still not cast off as it should be; otherwise it will be badly squandered. How is it that You surrender the strength of this city and the keys to its fortress to so cowardly a mayor who at the first attack allows the enemy to enter? Don't let Your love be so great, eternal King, as to place in risk such precious jewels. It seems, my Lord, that the occasion is given for esteeming them but little since You put them in the power of a thing so wretched, so lowly, so weak and miserable, and of so little importance. For although she strives with Your help not to lose them (and there is need for more than a little effort because of what I am), she cannot make use of them to win over anyone. In sum, she is a woman; and not a good but a wretched one. It seems that the talents are not only hidden but even buried by being placed in such vile earth. You are not accustomed, Lord, to bestow on a soul grandeurs and favors like these unless for the profit of many. You already know, my God, that with all my heart and will I beseech You and have besought You at times in the past that You grant these favors to someone who would make better use of them for the increase of Your glory -- and that I would consider it a blessing to lose the greatest earthly good possessable in order that You do so.
5. These and other things it often occurred to me to say. I saw afterward my foolishness and lack of humility; the Lord well knows what is fitting and that I would not have the strength in my soul to be saved if His Majesty didn't give it to me through so many favors.
6. I also intend to speak of the graces and effects that are left in the soul, of whether it can do something on its own to reach so great a state, and of what this something might be.
7. The elevation of the spirit, or joining with heavenly love, which I shall describe, takes place within this very union. The union, as I understand it, is different from the elevation. It will seem to anyone who may not have experienced this elevation of the spirit that there is no difference between the two; but, in my opinion, though they are one, the Lord works differently in each case. And in the flight of the spirit this difference is seen by a much greater increase in detachment from creatures. I have perceived clearly that the elevation of the spirit is a particular favor, even though as I say it may be the same as union or appear to be so. A small fire is just as much a fire as is a large one. Through this example one can see the difference there is between union and elevation of the spirit. In a small fire it takes a lot of time for a piece of iron to become red-hot. But if the fire is great, the piece of iron, even though large, will in a short time lose its entire being -- or it will appear to do so. This example, it seems to me, shows what the difference between the two favors from the Lord is like. I know that anyone who has reached the experience of raptures will understand the difference well. To one who has no experience the explanation will seem confusing, and it could well be. It is not surprising that there is confusion when a person like myself wants to speak of such a thing and to give some explanation of an experience that it seems one cannot even begin to put into words.
8. But I believe the Lord will help me in this explanation. His Majesty knows that besides obeying it is my intention to attract souls to so high a blessing. I shall say nothing about things of which I don't have much experience. And it is a fact that when I began to write about this last water it seemed impossible to know how to speak of it without making it sound like Greek; for it is very difficult to explain. So I set the work aside and went to receive Communion. Blessed be the Lord who so favors the ignorant! O virtue of obedience that can do all things! God enlightened my intellect: sometimes with words, at other times showing me how to explain this favor, as He did with the previous prayer. His Majesty, it seems, wanted to say what I neither was able nor knew how to say.
What I am telling is the complete truth, and so whatever is good is His doctrine; whatever is bad clearly comes from the ocean of evil that I am. Thus I say that if persons who had reached the experiences in prayer that the Lord has favored this miserable creature with -- and there must be many -- wanted to speak to me of these because they thought they had gone astray, the Lord would help His servant to show them the true way.
9. Well now, let us speak of this heavenly water that in its abundance soaks and saturates this entire garden: if the Lord were always to give it when there is need, the gardener would evidently have it easy. And if there were no winter and the weather were always mild, there would be no lack of flowers and fruit. It is obvious how delighted the gardener would be. But this is impossible while we are living on this earth. Individuals must always take care so that when one kind of water is lacking they might strive for the other. This water from heaven often comes when the gardener is least expecting it. True, in the beginning it almost always occurs after a long period of mental prayer. The Lord comes to take this tiny bird from one degree to another and to place it in the nest so that it may have repose. Since He has seen it fly about for a long time, striving with the intellect and the will and all its strength to see God and please Him, He desires to reward it even in this life. And what a tremendous reward; one moment is enough to repay all the trials that can be suffered in life!
10. While the soul is seeking God in this way, it feels with the most marvelous and gentlest delight that everything is almost fading away through a kind of swoon in which breathing and all the bodily energies gradually fail. This experience comes about in such a way that one cannot even stir the hands without a lot of effort. They eyes close without one's wanting them to close; or if these persons keep them open, they see hardly anything -- nor do they read or succeed in pronouncing a letter, nor can they hardly even guess what the letter is. They see the letter; but since the intellect gives no help, they don't know how to read it even though they may desire to do so. They hear but don't understand what they hear. Thus they receive no benefit from the senses -- unless it be that these latter do not take away their pleasure, since doing so would cause harm. In vain do they try to speak because they don't succeed in forming a word, nor if they do succeed is there the strength left to be able to pronounce it. All the external energy is lost, and that of the soul is increased so that it might better enjoy its glory. The exterior delight that is felt is great and very distinct.
11. This prayer causes no harm, no matter how long it lasts. At least it never caused me any, nor do I recall the Lord ever having granted me this favor that I didn't feel much better afterward no matter how ill I had been before. But what illness can produce so wonderful a blessing? The external effects are so apparent that one cannot doubt that a great event has taken place; these external powers are taken away with such delight in order to leave greater ones.
12. It is true that in the beginning this prayer passes so quickly -- at least it happened this way to me -- that neither these exterior signs nor the failure of the senses are very noticeable. But the soul well understands that the sun's brightness therein was powerful since it melted the soul away. It is noteworthy that the longest space of time, in my opinion, in which the soul remains in this suspension of all the faculties is very short; should it remain suspended for a half hour, this would be a very long time. I don't think I ever experienced this suspension for so long. It is true that since there is no sensory consciousness one finds it hard to know what is happening. But I am saying that in an occurrence of this prayer only a short time passes without one of the faculties returning to itself. It is the will that holds high the banner; the other two faculties quickly go back to being a bother. Since the will remains quiet, the others are again suspended for a little while -- then return again to life.
13. In this way a person can and in fact does spend several hours in prayer. Once the two faculties have begun to taste the divine wine and be inebriated by it, they easily lose themselves again so as to gain much more; and they accompany the will, and all three rejoice. But I say this loss of them all and suspension of the imagination -- which as I understand it is also completely lost -- lasts only a short while; yet these faculties don't return to themselves so completely that they are incapable of remaining for several hours as though bewildered while God gradually gathers them again to Himself.
14. Now let us come to what the soul experiences here interiorly. Let those who know how speak of it since it cannot be understood -- much less put into words!
After having received Communion and been in this very prayer I'm writing about, I was thinking when I wanted to write something on it of what the soul did during that time. The Lord spoke these words to me: "It detaches itself from everything, daughter, so as to abide more in me. It is no longer the soul that lives but I. Since it cannot comprehend what it understands, there is an understanding by not understanding."
Whoever may have experienced this prayer will know something about it; since what happens is so obscure, it can't be explained more clearly. I can only say that the soul appears to be joined to God, and there remains such certitude about this union that the soul cannot help believing in the truth of it. In this prayer all the faculties fail and they are so suspended that in no way, as I said, does one think they are working. If a person is reflecting upon some scriptural event, it becomes as lost to the memory as it would be if there had never been any thought of it. If the person reads, there is no remembrance of what was read; nor is there any remembrance if one prays vocally. Thus this bothersome little moth, which is the memory, gets its wings burnt here; it can no longer move. The will is fully occupied in loving, but it doesn't understand how it loves. The intellect, if it understands, doesn't understand how it understands; at least it can't comprehend anything of what it understands. It doesn't seem to me that it understands, because, as I say, it doesn't understand -- I really can't understand this!
15. In the beginning I was ignorant about a certain matter because I didn't know that God was in all things, and though He seemed so present to me, I thought this omnipresence was impossible. I couldn't stop believing that He was there since it seemed to me that I understood almostly clearly that He was there by His very presence. Those who had no learning told me that He was present only by grace. I couldn't believe this, because, as I say, it seemed to me He was present; and so I was troubled. A very learned man from the order of the glorious St. Dominic freed me from this doubt, for he told me that God was present and of how God communicates Himself to us; these truths consoled me tremendously.
It should be noted and understood that this heavenly water, this magnificent favor from the Lord, always leaves great fruits in the soul as I shall now explain.

CHAPTER 19
 
Continues on the same subject. Begins to explain the effects this degree of prayer produces in the soul. Strongly urges souls not to turn back, even if they fall again after receiving this favor, and not give up prayer. Speaks of the harm that results from abandoning prayer. This chapter is very important and most consoling for the weak and for sinners.
 
1. This prayer and union leaves the greatest tenderness in the soul in such a way that it would want to be consumed not from pain but from the joyous tears. It finds itself bathed in them without having felt them or knowing when or how it shed them. But it receives great delight in seeing that the driving force of that fire is quenched by a water that makes the fire increase. This sounds like gibberish, but that's what happens. It sometimes happened to me in this kind of prayer that I was so taken out of myself that I didn't know whether I was dreaming or whether the glory I was experiencing was indeed occurring. Seeing myself soaked by the water that came forth so forcefully and quickly and that seemingly poured from that heavenly cloud, I perceived that my experience had not been a dream. This prayer occurred in such a way at the beginning when it passed quickly.
2. The soul becomes so courageous that if at that moment it were cut in pieces for God, it would be greatly consoled. Such prayer is the source of heroic promises, of resolutions, and of ardent desires; it is the beginning of contempt for the world because of a clear perception of the world's vanity. The soul is much more improved and in a higher state than it was after the previous degrees of prayer. Its humility is deeper because it sees plainly that through no diligence of its own did it receive that very generous and magnificent gift and that it played no role in obtaining or experiencing it. Since there is no hidden cobweb in a room where much sun enters, the soul sees clearly that it is most unworthy; it sees its misery. Vainglory goes off so far that it doesn't seem possible for the soul to have any. Since there was hardly even any consent there, it now with its own eyes sees it is capable of little or nothing. It seems, though it didn't desire this, that the door of all the senses was closed to it that it might be better able to enjoy the Lord. It remains alone with Him. What has it to do but love Him? It neither sees nor hears save by much effort. There is not much to thank the soul for. Afterward, with striking truth, its past life and the great mercy of God are shown to it. The intellect doesn't have to go hunting for this knowledge because it beholds there, all cooked and prepared, what it must eat and understand. It perceives that it merits hell and that yet it is chastised with glory. It consumes itself in the praises of God -- and I would want to be consumed now. May You be blessed, my Lord, that from such filthy mud as I, You make water so clear that it can be served at your table! May You be praised, O Joy of the angels, for having desired to raise up a worm so vile!
3. This progress in virtue remains for some time with the soul. It can now, with clear understanding that the fruits are not its own, begin to distribute them since it has no need of them. It starts to show signs of a soul that guards heavenly treasures and has the desire to share them with others, and it beseeches God that it may not be the only rich one. It begins to be of benefit to its neighbors almost without knowing it or doing anything of itself. They recognize it because now the fragrance of the flowers has reached the point in which it attracts others. The soul understands that it has virtues, and its neighbors see the desirable fruit. They would like to help it eat this fruit. If the soil is well cultivated by trials, persecutions, criticisms, and illnesses -- for few there must be who reach this stage without them -- and if it is softened by living in great detachment from self-interest, the water soaks it to the extent that it is almost never dry. But if the soil is still hardened in the earth and has a lot of briers, as I did in the beginning, and is still not so removed from occasions and if it doesn't have the gratitude a favor as great as this deserves, the ground will dry up again. And if the gardener becomes careless and the Lord solely out of His goodness does not desire to let the rains come again, the garden can be considered as lost. So it happened to me sometimes. I am certainly amazed; if it hadn't befallen me, I'd be unable to believe it. I write this for the consolation of weak souls like myself that they might never despair or fail to trust in the greatness of God. Even though they may fall after elevations like the ones to which the Lord here brings them, they ought not to grow discouraged if they don't want to become completely lost. For tears gain all things: one water draws down the other.
4. That one ought not to grow discouraged is one of the reasons that encouraged me -- being what I am -- to obey and write an account of my wretched life and of the favors the Lord granted me without my serving Him but rather offending Him. I should certainly like to have a great deal of authority in this matter so that I might be believed. I beseech the Lord to give it. I say that no one who has begun to practice prayer should become discouraged by saying: "If I return to evil, matters will become worse should I continue the practice of prayer." I believe matters become worse if one abandons prayer and doesn't amend one's evil ways. But if people don't abandon it, they may believe that prayer will bring them to the harbor of light. The devil carried out a great assault upon me in this matter. Since I was wretched, I spent so long a time in thinking it was a lack of humility to practice prayer that, as I have already said, I abandoned it for a year and a half -- at least for a year; I don't remember well about the half. And doing this was no more, nor could it have been, than putting myself right in hell without the need of devils to urge me on. Oh, God help me, what great blindness! And how right the devil is to direct his attacks so that the soul give up prayer! The traitor knows that he has lost the soul that practices prayer perseveringly and that all the falls he helps it to take assist it afterward, through the goodness of God, to make a great leap forward in the Lord's service. No wonder he's so concerned!
5. O my Jesus! What a sight it is when You through Your mercy return to offer Your hand and raise up a soul that has fallen in sin after having reached this stage! How such a soul knows the multitude of Your grandeurs and mercies and its own misery! In this state it is in truth consumed and knows Your splendors. Here it doesn't dare raise its eyes, and here it raises them up so as to know what it owes You. Here it becomes a devotee of the Queen of heaven so that she might appease You; here it invokes the help of the saints that fell after having been called by You. Here it seems that everything You give it is undeserved because it sees that it doesn't merit the ground on which it treads. Here, in approaching the sacraments, it has the living faith to see the power that God has placed in them; it praises You because You have left such a medicine and ointment for our wounds and because this medicine not only covers these wounds but takes them away completely. It is amazed by all this. And who, Lord of my soul, wouldn't be amazed by so much mercy and a favor so large for a betrayal so ugly and abominable? I don't know why my heart doesn't break as I write this! For I am a wretched person!
6. With these little tears, given by You, that I shed -- water, on my part, from so loathsome a well -- it seems I repay You for all my betrayals, in which I always do evil and strive to undo the favors You've granted me. Place a value, my Lord, upon these tears. Cleanse this water so foul lest others be tempted to make judgments, as happened to me, when they wonder why, Lord, You abandon some very holy persons who have always served and labored for You, who were brought up religiously and who are truly religious (and not like myself who was a religious only in name), and when they see clearly that You do not grant them the favors you do me. I well perceived, my God, that You keep the reward so as to give it to those holy persons all together and that I need this reward because of my weakness. Now they, like strong men, serve You without these favors; and You deal with them as with a fortified people and not a self-interested one.
7. Nevertheless, You know, my Lord, that I often called out to You to excuse those persons who criticized me because it seemed to me they were more than right. This occurred, Lord, after You kept me, out of your goodness, from offending You so much and when I was turning aside from all that it seemed to me could anger You. When I did this, You began, Lord, to open Your treasures to Your handmaid. It doesn't seem You were waiting for anything other than the will and readiness in me to receive them since You quickly began not only to give them but to desire that others know You were giving them.
8. Once others knew this, I began to be held in esteem by those who had not yet realized what a wretched person I was however much this evil showed through. Suddenly the criticism and persecution began; but, in my opinion, with every reason. So I didn't bear ill-will toward anybody, but besought You to observe how right they were. They said I was trying to make myself out to be a saint and was inventing novelties without then even having attained to the full observance of my rule or to the level of the very good and holy nuns there were in the house. (Nor do I myself believe I will ever arrive if God in His goodness doesn't do everything Himself). They said that rather it was I who was taking away the good customs and introducing those that were not -- at least that I was doing what I could to introduce them and that I was capable of causing a great deal of harm. So without any fault on their part they accused me. I don't say that only the nuns did this, but there were other persons as well. They revealed truths to me because You permitted this, Lord.
9. Once, in the midst of such persecution, while reciting the Hours, I came to the verse that says: Justus es, Domine, and Your judgments. I began to think of what a great truth this was. For the evil never had the power to tempt me to doubt that You, my Lord, possess all good things, or to tempt me in any matter of faith; rather it seemed to me that the more the things of faith go beyond what is natural the stronger the faith -- and this thought enkindled great devotion in me. Just believing that You are all powerful was enough for me to receive all the grandeurs that You work, and this power, as I say, I never doubted. Thus, while I was thinking that You justly permit that there be many, as I have mentioned, who are very good servants of Yours and yet do not receive these gifts and favors You grant me because of what I am, You answered me, Lord: "Serve me, and don't bother about such things." This was the first locution I heard You speak to me, and so I was very frightened.
Since, among other things, I shall afterward explain this manner of understanding, I will not speak of it here; it would be off the subject -- and I think I've already gone far off. I hardly know what I've said. It can't be otherwise, my son; your Reverence must endure these digressions. When I see what patience God has had with me and see myself in this state, it doesn't take much to lose the thread of what I'm saying and intend to say. May it please the Lord that my follies be always like these, and may His Majesty no longer allow me to have the power to offend Him the least bit; rather, may I be consumed in this prayer.
10. What I've said is enough now for beholding His great mercies, not the one time but the many times He has pardoned so much ingratitude. Saint Peter, You pardoned once when he was ungrateful; me, You pardoned many times. With what reason the devil tempted me not to pretend to be a friend with one whom I treated publicly like an enemy. What terrible blindness mine was! Where, my Lord, did I think I could find a remedy save in You? What folly; to flee from the light so as to be always stumbling! Such proud humility the devil invented in me: withdrawing from the column and the staff which were my support against a fall so great! Now I make the sign of the cross with amazement, and it doesn't seem to me that I underwent any danger as bad as with this invention the devil taught me under the pretext of humility. He put the thought in my head to question how, since I was so wretched and had received so many favors, I could engage in prayer; and the thought that it was enough for me to recite, like everyone else, my obligatory vocal prayers; and the question about how I could pretend to do more since I didn't even say my vocal prayers well; he suggested that engaging in prayer showed a lack of reverence and little esteem for the favors of God.
It was right to think about and understand these things; but to give up the practice of prayer was the greatest evil. May You be blessed, Lord, who came to my rescue.
11. It seems to me that this was the way the devil began to tempt Judas, except that in my case this traitorous devil did not work so openly; but little by little he did to me what he did to Judas. For the love of God let all those who practice prayer observe this. Let them know that during the time in which I was without prayer my life was much worse. Look at the good remedy the devil gave me and the charming humility -- the great disquiet within me. But how could I quiet my soul? It was losing its calm; it remembered favors and gifts; it saw that this world's pleasures are disgusting. How it was able to go on amazes me. I did so by means of hope because I never thought (insofar as I now recall, for this must have happened twenty-one years ago) I would cease being determined to return to prayer -- but I was waiting to be very purified of sin. Oh, how wrong was the direction in which I was going with this hope! The devil would have kept me hoping until judgment day and then have led me into hell.
12. Through the practice of prayer and spiritual reading I knew the truths and the bad road I was following and often entreated the Lord with many tears, but I was so wretched that these were of no avail. Separated from prayer, taken up with many pastimes and placed in many occasions with few aids -- and I dare say none, unless they were aids to my falling -- what was there to hope for except hell, as I mentioned?
I believe that a Dominican friar, a very learned man, is worthy of merit in the sight of God, for he woke me from this sleep if not completely from my evil ways. He made me receive Communion, as I believe I mentioned, every fifteen days. I began to return to my senses, although I didn't cease offending the Lord. But since I hadn't lost the way, I advanced on it, even though very gradually, by falling and rising. And the one who doesn't fail to walk and advance on it shall arrive even though late. I don't think losing the way means anything else than giving up prayer. May God free us because of who He is!
13. My experience explains -- and close attention should be given to it for the love of the Lord -- that even though a soul may reach the stage in which God grants it such wonderful favors in prayer, it should not trust in itself; it can fall. Nor should it in any way place itself in the occasions of falling. This should be carefully noted because it is very important. The deception the devil can afterward cause in this matter, even though the favor is certainly from God, is that the traitor profits as much as he can from this same gift. He deceives persons who are not advanced in the virtues, or mortified, or detached. They are not strong enough, as I shall say, to enter into the midst of occasions and dangers, no matter how great their desires and resolutions. This doctrine is excellent, and it is not mine, but taught by God. And so I would want ignorant persons, like myself, to know it. Even though a soul may be in this state, it must not trust itself in going out to battle, for it will have a hard time defending itself. Here one needs arms to defend oneself against devils, and persons in this state do not yet have the strength to fight against them and trample them under foot as do those who are in the state I shall afterward speak about.
14. The devil plays a trick on the soul. Since it sees itself so close to God and perceives the difference there is between heavenly and earthly goods and the love the Lord shows it, it gains confidence from this love and the feeling of security that it will not fall away from what it enjoys. It thinks it clearly sees the reward and that it is no longer possible for it to abandon something that, even in this life, is so delightful and pleasing for anything as foul and base as earthly pleasure. And by means of this confidence the devil takes away its lowly estimation of itself. Believing it has no longer anything to fear from itself, as I say, the soul places itself in dangers and begins with splendid zeal to give away fruit without measure. It doesn't do this with pride; it well understands that of itself it can do nothing. It does it with great confidence in God, but without discretion since it doesn't observe that it is still a fledgling. It can leave the nest, and God takes it out; but it is still not ready to fly. The virtues are not yet strong, nor does it have the experience to recognize dangers, nor does it know the harm done by relying upon oneself.
15. This self-reliance was what destroyed me. For this reason and for every reason there is need of a master and for discussions with spiritual persons. I truly believe that God will not fail to favor the soul that reaches this state; nor will He allow it to be lost, unless it completely abandons His Majesty. But when, as I have said, it falls, it should be extremely careful for the love of the Lord not to be tricked into giving up prayer, as I was by the devil through false humility -- as I have already said and would like to say many times. It should trust in the goodness of God, which is greater than all the evils we are capable of. And He doesn't remember our ingratitude when we, although knowing about it, desire to return to His friendship; nor does He remember the favors He bestowed on us as punishment for these evils. On the contrary, all of this helps us to receive pardon more quickly as members of His household who have eaten, as I say, from His table. Souls should remember His words and see what He did with me; before I grew tired of offending Him, His Majesty began to pardon me. He never tires of giving, nor can He exhaust His mercies. Let us not tire of receiving. May He be blessed forever, amen -- and may all things praise Him.

CHAPTER 20
 
Discusses the difference between union and rapture. Explains the nature of rapture and tells something about the good possessed by the soul that the Lord in His kindness brings to this prayer of rapture. Tells of its effects. There is much to marvel over.
 
1. I should like to know how to explain, with God's help, the difference there is between union and rapture, or, as they call it, elevation or flight of the spirit, or transport, which are all the same. I mean that these latter terms, though different, refer to the same thing; it is also called ecstasy. The advantage rapture has over union is great. The rapture produces much stronger effects and causes many other phenomena. Union seems the same at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end; and it takes place in the interior of the soul. But since these other phenomena are of a higher degree, they produce their effect both interiorly and exteriorly. May the Lord explain as He did for the other degrees. Certainly, if His Majesty had not given me an understanding of the manners and ways in which something could be said about them, I would not have known how to speak of them.
2. Let us consider now that the last water we spoke of is so plentiful that, if it were not for the fact that the earth doesn't allow it, we could believe that this cloud of His great Majesty is with us here on earth. But when we thank Him for this wonderful blessing, responding with works according to our strength, the Lord gathers up the soul, let us say now, in the way the clouds gather up the earthly vapors and raises it completely out of itself. The cloud ascends to heaven and brings the soul along, and begins to show it the things of the kingdom that He prepared for it. I don't know if this comparison is holding together, but the truth of the matter is that this is what happens.
3. In these raptures it seems that the soul is not animating the body. Thus there is a very strong feeling that the natural bodily heat is failing it. The body gradually grows cold, although this happens with the greatest ease and delight. At this stage there is no remedy that can be used to resist. In the union, since we are upon our earth, there is a remedy; though it may take pain and effort one can almost always resist. But in these raptures most often there is no remedy; rather, without any forethought or any help there frequently comes a force so swift and powerful that one sees and feels this cloud or mighty eagle raise it up and carry it aloft on its wings.
4. I say that one understands and sees oneself carried away and does not know where. Although this experience is delightful, our natural weakness causes fear in the beginning. It is necessary that the soul be resolute and courageous -- much more so than for the prayer already described -- in order to risk all, come what may, and abandon itself into the hands of God and go willingly wherever it is brought since, like it or not, one is taken away. So forceful is this enrapturing that very many times I wanted to resist and used all my energy, especially sometimes when it happened in public or other times when in secret and I was afraid of being deceived. At times I was able to accomplish something, but with a great loss of energy, as when someone fights with a giant and afterward is worn out. At other times it was impossible for me to resist, but it carried off my soul and usually, too, my head along with it, without my being able to hold back -- and sometimes the whole body until it was raised from the ground.
5. This latter has happened rarely. Once it happened when we were together in the choir ready to go up to receive Communion and while I was kneeling. I was very distressed because the experience seemed to me to be something most extraordinary and it would then become widely known. So I ordered the nuns -- for this happened recently while I held the office of prioress -- not to say anything about it. But at other times when I began to see the Lord was going to do the same (and once when there were some ladies of nobility present in order to hear a sermon, for it was our titular feast), I stretched out on the floor and the nuns came and held me down; nonetheless, this was seen. I begged the Lord very much not to give me any more favors that would involve any outward show, for I was tired of being considered so important -- and His Majesty could grant me that favor without it being known. It seems in His goodness He was pleased to hear me because up to the present I have never had this experience again; true, I made this petition not so long ago.
6. It seems to have happened that when I desired to resist them, such great powers raised me up from the very soles of my feet that I don't know what to compare these powers to; they were much greater than in the other spiritual experiences -- and so I was worn out. The struggle is a fierce one, and in the end struggle is of little avail against the Lord's desire; there is no power against His power. At other times He is pleased that we see He desires to grant us the favor and that nothing is lacking on His Majesty's part; and when we resist out of humility, the very same effects are left in the soul that would be left if it were to give complete consent.
7. In those to whom this experience happens, the effects are remarkable. First, there is a manifestation of the tremendous power of the Lord and of how we are incapable, when His Majesty desires, of holding back the body any more than the soul, nor are we its master. Rather, whether or not we wish, we see that there is one who is superior, that these favors are given by Him, and that of ourselves we can do absolutely nothing; deep humility is impressed upon the soul. Yet I confess that the favor greatly frightened me; at first the fear is extreme. When one sees one's body so elevated from the ground that even though the spirit carries it along after itself, and does so very gently if one does not resist, one's feelings are not lost. At least I was conscious in such a way that I could understand I was being elevated. There is revealed a majesty about the One who can do this that makes a person's hair stand on edge, and there remains a strong fear of offending so awesome a God. Yet such fear is accompanied by a very great love for Him, which grows ever deeper upon considering what he does to so rotten a worm. It doesn't seem He is satisfied in truly bringing the soul to Himself, but it seems He desires the body even though it is mortal and, on account of the many offenses it has committed, made of such foul clay.
8. The experience also leaves a rare detachment, which I am unable to describe. It seems to me that I can say the prayer is in a certain way different. I mean that more than spiritual things alone are involved. For now that the spirit is completely detached from things, it seems in this prayer that the Lord wants to effect this detachment in the body itself, and there is brought about a new estrangement from earthly things that makes life much more arduous.
9. Afterward there is a painful experience that we cannot produce ourselves, nor once it is felt can we put it aside. I should like so much to explain this deep pain. I believe I'll be unable to do so, but I'll try to say something. It should be noted that these experiences occur much later than all the visions and revelations I shall write of. The time I used to spend in a prayer in which the Lord gave me such great consolations and gifts -- even though these are not completely absent -- is now usually spent in this painful prayer I shall speak of. It is sometimes more intense, sometimes less intense. I want to speak now of when it is more intense. For although I shall speak afterward of those great loving impulses that I experienced when the Lord desired to give me raptures, those impulses are no more, in my opinion, than something that is very corporeal when compared to something very spiritual -- and I don't think I'm greatly exaggerating. For in the pain that is experienced in those impulses, the body feels it along with the soul, and both seem to have a share in it; there is not as extreme a desolation as is felt in this pain. In receiving this pain, as I said, we play no active role, but often a desire comes unexpectedly in a way I don't understand. With this desire, which penetrates the whole soul at once, the soul begins to grow so weary that it ascends far above itself and all creatures. God places it in a desert so distant from all things that, however, much it labors, it doesn't find a creature on earth that might accompany it -- nor would it want to find one; it desires only to die in that solitude. That someone speak to it -- and it wants to make every effort possible to speak -- is of little avail since the spirit, no matter how much the soul tries, does not leave that solitude. And when it seems to me that God is then exceedingly far away, He at times communicates His grandeurs in the most strange manner thinkable. So one doesn't know how to speak of this communication, nor do I think anyone will believe me or understand it unless they have experienced it themselves. This communication is given not to console but to show the reason the soul has for becoming weary in the absence of a blessing that in itself contains all blessings.
10. With this communication the desire increases and also the extreme sense of solitude in which, even though the soul is in that desert, it sees with a pain so delicate and penetrating that it can, I think literally say: Vigilavi, et factus sum sicut passer solitarius in tecto. (And perhaps the royal prophet said it while being in the same solitude, although since he was a saint the Lord would have given him this experience in a more intense way). Hence this verse then came to mind, for I think I saw it realized in myself. It consoled me to know that other persons -- and such great ones -- had experienced so extreme a solitude. Thus it seems that the soul is not in itself, but on the roof or housetop of itself and of all created things because it seems to me to be even above the very superior part of the soul.
11. At other times it seems the soul goes about as though compelled to say and ask itself: where is your God? It is interesting to note that I didn't know what the vernacular of this verse was; after I understood it, I was consoled to see that the Lord had brought it to my mind without my having played any part in the matter. At other times I recalled what St. Paul says, that he is crucified to the world. I am not saying that these words apply here; I realize they don't. But it seems to me that the soul is crucified since no consolation comes to it from heaven, nor is it in heaven; neither does it desire any from earth, nor is it on earth. Receiving no help from either side, it is as though crucified between heaven and earth. That which comes from heaven (which, as I said, is so admirable a knowledge of God, very far above every desirable thing) causes more torment because the desire increases in such a way that, in my opinion, the intense pain sometimes takes away sensory consciousness; but this intensity lasts only a short time. The experience resembles the death agony with the difference that the suffering bears along with it such great happiness that I don't know what to compare it to. It is an arduous delightful martyrdom since it admits no earthly thing representable to the soul, even if this be what is usually more pleasing to it. The soul, it seems, immediately hurls such things from itself. It clearly understands that it desires only its God. It doesn't love any particular aspect of Him, but loves Him all together and knows not what it loves. I say it "knows not" because the imagination doesn't represent anything; nor, in my opinion, do the faculties function during much of the time that this takes place. Just as it is joy that suspends the faculties in union and rapture, so it is pain that suspends them here.
12. O Jesus! Who could give a good explanation of this prayer to your Reverence so that you could explain it to me? It is what my soul is now always experiencing. Usually when unoccupied it is placed in the midst of these anxious longings for death; and when it sees they are beginning, it fears that it will not die. But once in the midst of them, it would desire to spend the remainder of its life in this suffering, even though the suffering is so excessive a person cannot endure it. Sometimes my pulse almost stops, according to what a number of the Sisters say who at times are near me and know more, and my arms are straight and my hands so stiff that occasionally I cannot join them. As a result, even the next day I feel pain in the pulse and in the body, as if the bones were disjoined.
13. I sometimes really think that if this prayer continues as it does now, the Lord would be served if my life came to an end. In my opinion, a pain as great as this is sufficient to put an end to life, but I don't merit death. All my longing then is to die; nor do I think about purgatory or of the great sins I've committed by which I've merited hell. I am oblivious of everything in that anxious longing to see God; that desert and solitude seem to the soul better than all the companionship of the world. If anything could give the soul consolation, it would be to speak to someone who had suffered this torment.
14. It is also a torment for the soul to see that even though it complains no one, seemingly, will believe it. This pain is so intense that the soul would not want solitude as before, nor would it want companionship with anyone other than one to whom it can complain. It is like a person suffocating with a rope around the neck and seeking to find relief. So it seems to me that this desire for companionship comes from our weakness, for the pain places us in danger of death. (Yes, this is what it certainly does. I have at times on account of my great illnesses and crises been in peril of death, as I mentioned; and I believe it can be said that this danger is as great as all the others). As a result, the desire the body and the soul have of not being separated is what makes one beg help in order to get relief. By speaking and complaining of the pain and by distracting itself, the soul seeks a remedy so as to live -- much against the will of the spirit, or of its superior part, which would not want to break away from this pain.
15. I don't know if I'm meeting with success in what I'm saying or if I know how to say it, but in my firm opinion this is what happens. See, your Reverence, what rest the soul can have in this life. That rest that it had -- which was prayer and solitude, because through these the Lord comforted me -- now usually consists of this torment. Yet the torment is so pleasing and seen to be so valuable that now the soul desires this more than all the favors previously experienced. The experience seems safer because it follows the way of the cross. In contains in itself a very precious consolation, in my opinion; the body shares only in the pain, and it is the soul alone that both suffers and rejoices on account of the joy and satisfaction the suffering gives. I don't know how this can happen, but it does. In my opinion, I would not trade this gift the Lord grants me (which comes from His hand and, as I said, is in no way acquired by me, because it is very, very supernatural) for all those I shall speak of afterward. I don't mean all those gifts taken together, but taken one by one. It must not be forgotten that this experience of pain comes after all those favors that are written of in this book, and it is what the Lord now grants me.
16. When I was afraid in the beginning (as happens to me in the case of almost every gift the Lord gives me until His Majesty assures me as I make progress), the Lord told me not to fear and to esteem this gift more than all the others He had granted me. In this pain the soul is purified and fashioned or purged like gold in the crucible so that the enameled gifts might be placed there in a better way, and in this prayer it is purged of what otherwise it would have to be purged of in purgatory.
I clearly understood that it was a great favor, but I was left with much more assurance -- and my confessor tells me that it is good. Although, since I am so wretched, I was afraid, I was never able to believe that it was bad; on the contrary, so abundant a blessing caused me fear when I remembered how poorly I merited it. Blessed be the Lord who is so good. Amen.
17. It seems I've gone off the subject because I began to speak of raptures; this that I have been speaking about is more than rapture, and so it leaves the effects I mentioned.
18. Now let us return to raptures and speak of what is more common in them. I say that often, it seems to me, the body was left so light that all its weight was gone, and sometimes this feeling reached such a point that I almost didn't know how to put my feet on the ground. Now when the body is in rapture it is as though dead, frequently being unable to do anything of itself. It remains in the position it was when seized by the rapture, whether standing or sitting, or whether with the hands opened or closed. Although once in a while the senses fail (sometimes it happened to me that they failed completely), this occurs rarely and for only a short time. But ordinarily the soul is disoriented. Even though it can't do anything of itself with regard to exterior things, it doesn't fail to understand and hear as though it were listening to something coming from far off. I do not say that it hears and understands when it is at the height of the rapture (I say "height" to refer to the times when the faculties are lost to other things because of their intense union with God), for then, in my opinion, it neither sees, nor hears, nor feels. But as I said in speaking of the previous prayer of union, this complete transformation of the soul in God lasts only a short time; but while it lasts no faculty is felt, nor does the soul know what is happening in this prayer. Perhaps it doesn't know this because God doesn't want us to understand this while on earth; He knows we are incapable of doing so. I have seen this for myself.
19. Your Reverence will ask how it is that the rapture sometimes lasts so many hours and occurs so often. What happens in my case, as I said in speaking of the previous prayer, is that the rapture is experienced at intervals. The soul is often absorbed or, to put it better, the Lord absorbs it in Himself suspending all the faculties for a while and then, afterward, holding only the will suspended. It seems to me that the activity of these other two faculties is like that of the little pointer on the sundial that never stops. But when the Sun of justice wants to, He makes the faculties stop. This suspension of the two faculties, I say, is brief. But since the loving impulse and elevation of the spirit was great, the will remains absorbed -- even though these return to their noisy way -- and, like the lord over all, causes those effects in the body. Although the other two restless faculties desire to hinder it, they are the only enemies because the sense faculties do not hinder it. The will causes these sense faculties to be suspended because the Lord desires it so. For most of the time the eyes are closed even though we may not desire to close them; and if they are sometimes open, as I have already mentioned, the soul doesn't notice or advert to what it sees.
20. What it can do through its own power is much less in this prayer; and when the two faculties are again suspended in the union, there isn't much to do. For this reason whoever receives this favor from the Lord should not become disconsolate on seeing that the body is so bound for many hours and the intellect and the memory sometimes distracted. True, these faculties are ordinarily absorbed in the praises of God or in desiring to comprehend and understand what they have undergone -- and even for this they are not fully awake but are like a person who has slept and dreamed for a long while and still hasn't completely awakened.
21. I'm explaining this at such length because I know that there are now, even in this place, persons to whom the Lord grants these favors. If those who guide them have not gone through this themselves, it may perhaps seem to these guides, especially if they aren't learned men, that these persons are as though dead during the rapture. And, as I shall say afterward, what these persons suffer when their confessors do not understand them is a pity. Perhaps I don't know what I'm talking about. Your Reverence will understand whether I succeed in explaining myself since the Lord has already given you experience of this rapture -- although since you haven't been experiencing it for a long time, perhaps you haven't observed it as much as I have.
Thus, however hard I try to stir, there is not strength enough in the body for a good while to be able to do so; the soul carries off with it all this strength. Frequently the body is made healthy and stronger -- for it was really sick and full of great sufferings -- because something wonderful is given to it in that prayer. The Lord sometimes desires, as I say, that the body enjoy it since the body is now obedient to what the soul desires. After the soul returns to itself -- if the rapture has been intense -- it goes about for a day or two, or even three, with the faculties absorbed or as though stupefied; it seems to be outside itself.
22. From this prayer comes the pain of having to return to everyday life; in this prayer wings sprout enabling one to fly with ease; the fledgling has shed its down; in this prayer Christ's banner is now completely raised. It seems just as though the custodian of this fortress climbs, or is taken up, to the highest tower to raise the banner for God. He looks at those below as one who is out of danger. He no longer fears dangers but rather desires them as someone who in a certain manner receives assurance there of victory. In it the soul sees very clearly how little everything here below should be esteemed and the trifle that it is. Whoever stands upon a height sees many things. The soul no longer wants to desire, nor would it want to have free will -- and this is what I beg the Lord. It gives Him the keys of its will.
Behold now the gardener is raised to the position of custodian. He desires to do nothing but the will of the Lord; nor does he want to be lord of himself or of anything -- not even of a pear-tree in this garden. If there is something good in the garden, His Majesty distributes it. From here on the soul desires nothing for itself; it wants its actions to be in complete conformity with His glory and His will.
23. And the truth of the matter is that if the raptures are authentic, all of this takes place; the soul receives the effects and benefits that were mentioned. If these effects are not present, I would greatly doubt that the raptures come from God; on the contrary, I would fear lest they be caused by the rabies, as St. Vincent observed. I understand and have seen through experience that after an hour or less the soul is left with such freedom and dominion over all things that it doesn't know itself. It sees clearly that the good effects don't belong to it. It doesn't know how so much good was given it, but it well understands the tremendous benefit that each of these raptures bears with it. There is no one who believes this if they haven't experienced it. Thus they don't believe the poor soul, because they have seen its wretchedness -- and now so quickly see it strive after things demanding such courage. For soon the soul becomes obsessed with serving the Lord not just a little but as much as it can. They think this is a temptation and foolishness. Were they to understand that these desires don't spring from the soul but from the Lord to whom it has given the keys of its will, they wouldn't be surprised.
24. I have the opinion that a soul that reaches this state no longer speaks or does anything for itself. This sovereign King takes care of all that it has to do. Oh, God help me, how clearly the meaning of the psalm is seen here; and how right are all those who long for the wings of a dove! It is clearly understood that the flight is given to the spirit so that it may be elevated above every creature -- and above itself first of all. The flight is an easy flight, a delightful one, a flight without noise.
25. How great is the dominion of that soul brought here by the Lord; it beholds everything without being ensnared! How ashamed it feels of the time when it was ensnared! How frightened of its blindness! What pity it feels for those who are still in this blindness, especially if they are persons of prayer whom God already favors! It would want to cry out in order to make known how deceived they are -- sometimes it even does so, and a thousand persecutions rain down upon its head. They consider this person lacking in humility, especially if she is a woman, and point out that she desires to teach the one from whom she should be learning. As a result they condemn this soul -- and with reason -- because they don't know the loving impulse that moves it. For at times the soul can't help but disillusion -- nor endure not disillusioning -- those whom it loves and desires to see freed from the prison of this life, since the life that it formerly lived was nothing else than a prisoner's life; nor does it seem to it to have been anything else than that.
26. It deplores the time in which it was concerned about its reputation and deplores the deception it suffered in believing that what the world called honor was honor. It sees how this belief about honor is the greatest lie and that all of us are involved in it. It understands that authentic honor stands not with falsehood but with truth, judging what is something to be something, and what is nothing to be nothing, since everything that comes to an end is nothing and less than nothing and is not pleasing to God.
27. The soul laughs to itself over the time when it esteemed money and coveted it, although in this matter of coveting money, I don't think I ever -- and this is true -- confessed a fault; but it was fault enough to have esteemed it. If with money I could have bought the good I now see in myself, I would have esteemed it highly; but I see that this good is won by giving up everything. What is it we buy with this money we desire? Is it something valuable? Is it something lasting? Oh, why do we desire it? Miserable is the rest achieved that costs so dearly. Frequently one obtains hell with money and buys everlasting fire and pain without end. Oh, if everyone would consider it unprofitable dirt, how harmoniously would the world proceed, how many lawsuits would be avoided! What friendship there would be among all if there were no self-interest about honor and money! I think this absence of self-interest would solve all problems.
28. The soul sees such great blindness in pleasures and how with them one buys trouble -- even for this life -- and worry. What restlessness! What little happiness! What vain labor! In this prayer it sees not only serious faults and cobwebs in its soul but any speck of dust no matter how small because the sun is very bright. And so, no matter how much a soul labors to become perfect, if this Sun truly takes hold of it, everything is seen as very turbid. The soul is like water in a glass: the water looks very clear if the sun doesn't shine on it; but when the sun shines on it, it seems to be full of dust particles. This comparison is an exact one. Before being in this ecstasy the soul thinks it is careful about not offending God and that it is doing what it can in conformity with its strength. But once it is brought into prayer, which this Sun of justice bestows on it and which opens its eyes, it sees so many dust particles that it would want to close its eyes again. It is not yet so much a child of this powerful eagle that it can gaze steadily at this sun. But for the little time that it holds its eyes open, it sees that it is itself filled with mud. It recalls the psalm that says: Who will be just in Your Presence?
29. When it beholds this divine Sun, the brightness dazzles it; when it looks at itself, the mud covers its eyes; blind is this little dove. So, very frequently, it is left totally blind, absorbed, frightened, and in a swoon from the many grandeurs that it sees. In this stage true humility is gained so that the soul doesn't care at all about saying good things of itself, nor that others say them. The Lord, not the soul, distributes the fruit of the garden, and so nothing sticks to its hands. All the good it possesses is directed to God; if it says something about itself, it does so for God's glory. It knows that it owns nothing in the garden; and even should it desire to ignore this truth, it can't. Whether it wants to or not, it sees with its own eyes that the Lord makes it close them to all the things of the world so that it may keep them open for the understanding of truths.
