CHAPTER 39
 
Continues on the same subject, telling of the great favors the Lord granted her. Treats of how He promised to answer her prayers for other persons. Tells of some remarkable instances in which His Majesty granted her this favor.
 
1. Once while I was imploring the Lord to give sight to a person to whom I was obligated and who had almost completely lost his vision, I was very grieved and feared that because of my sins the Lord would not hear me. The Lord appeared to me as He did at other times and began to show me the wound in His left hand, and with the other hand He drew out a large nail that had been embedded there. It seemed to me that when the nail was pulled out His flesh was torn out along with it. The sharp pain was clearly evident, and I felt great pity. He told me that He who had suffered that for me should not be doubted, but that in a better way He would do what I had asked Him; that He had promised me there wasn't anything I might ask Him that He wouldn't do; that He already knew I wouldn't ask for anything other than what was in conformity with His glory; and that thus He would do what I was now requesting; that I should consider that even when I wasn't serving Him there wasn't anything I asked for that He didn't grant, and in a better way than I knew how to ask for; that how much more He would grant my petitions now that He knew I loved Him; that I shouldn't doubt this. I don't think eight days passed before the Lord gave sight back to that person. My confessor knew of this soon afterward. It could be that this cure didn't come about because of my prayer; but since I had seen this vision, I felt such certitude that I thanked His Majesty as though the favor had been granted to me.
2. At another time there was a person very sick with a most painful illness, which I won't name here because I don't know what kind of illness it was. What he suffered for two months was unbearable; the torment was lacerating. My confessor, who was the rector I mentioned above, went to see him; he took great pity on him and told me I should by all means go to see him, that since he was a relative of mine I could do this. I went and was moved to such pity for him that I began to beg the Lord insistently for his health. In this experience I saw fully and clearly the favor the Lord granted me; the next day this person was completely cured of that affliction.
3. Once I felt severely troubled because I knew that a person to whom I was very much obligated desired to do something serious against the honor of God, as well as his own; he was already very determined about the matter. My anxiety was so great I didn't know what to do. It no longer seemed there was any remedy to make him give up the idea. I begged the Lord with all my heart to provide a cure for him; but until seeing this cure I wasn't able to find any alleviation in my affliction. Being in such a state, I went to a secluded hermitage (for we have them in this monastery); and while in the one with the painting of Christ at the pillar, and begging Him to grant me this favor, I heard a very gentle voice speaking to me in a kind of whistling sound. My hair stood on end, for the voice frightened me. I wanted to understand what it was saying; but I couldn't, because it passed very quickly. When my fear was gone, for it went away quickly, I felt such quiet and joy and interior delight that I marveled that just hearing the sound of a voice could effect so much in the soul; for I heard it with my bodily ears and without understanding a word. In this experience I realized that what I had asked for would be accomplished. As a result it happened that my affliction left me completely even though the prayer was not yet answered; the pain went away just as it would had I seen the prayer answered as it really was afterward. I told this to my confessors, for I then had two who were very learned and were good servants of God.
4. I knew a person who had resolved to serve God very earnestly and had devoted some days to prayer in which His Majesty granted him many favors. Because of some occasions of sin that he was in, he gave up prayer and did not withdraw from these occasions; and they were indeed dangerous. This pained me deeply since he was a person I loved very much and to whom I owed a great deal. I believe it was more than a month in which I didn't do anything else but beg God to bring this soul back to Himself. One day, while in prayer, I saw a devil at my side who very angrily was tearing to shreds some papers he had in his hands. This gave me great consolation, for it seemed to me that what I had been asking for had been accomplished. And so it was, for afterward, I learned that this person had made his confession with great contrition and returned to God so sincerely that I hope in His Majesty he will always make progress. May God be blessed forever. Amen.
5. It often happens that our Lord draws souls away from serious sin and also that He leads others to greater perfection because of my beseeching Him. The Lord has granted me so many favors by freeing souls from purgatory and doing other noteworthy things that I would tire myself and tire whoever reads this if I mentioned them all. He has granted much more in regard to the health of souls than He has in regard to the health of bodies. This has become something well known, and there are many witnesses to it. At the beginning it made me very scrupulous because I couldn't help believing that the Lord granted these favors because of my prayer -- setting aside the main fact of His doing them solely out of His goodness. But now there are so many cases, and they are so obvious to other persons, that it doesn't bother me to believe this. I praise His Majesty -- and am embarrassed -- because I see that I'm more indebted to Him; the fact that He does this quickens my love and causes an increase in my desire to serve Him. What amazes me more is that I'm unable to ask, even though I want to, for the things the Lord finds unsuitable; I feel so little enthusiasm, spirit, and concern that, however much I want to force myself, it is impossible to ask. Whereas in the case of other things that His Majesty is going to do, I find I can pray for them often, and with great insistence. Even when I don't have this concern myself, it seems to be put before me.
6. The difference between these two kinds of petition is so great I don't know how to explain it. In the one case I don't cease forcing myself to beg the Lord, even though I may not feel that fervor in myself -- although the petitions are close to my heart -- that I feel for other petitions. I feel like someone whose tongue is tied; although she may want to speak, she cannot; and if she does speak, she does so in such a way that she finds she isn't understood. In the other case I feel like one who speaks clearly and diligently to someone who is listening very eagerly. In the first case, the petition is made, let us say for now, as it is in vocal prayer; in the other, it is made in sublime contemplation; the Lord so manifests Himself that He makes it known He hears us and is glad we ask this of Him and to grant us the favor. May He be blessed forever who gives so much, and to whom I give so little. For what does one do, my Lord, who doesn't get rid of everything for You? How I fail, how I fail -- and I could say it a thousand times -- to get rid of everything for You! There's no reason on this account to want to live (although there are other reasons), because I don't live in conformity with what I owe You. How many imperfections I see in myself! What laxity in serving You! Indeed I think sometimes I would like to be without consciousness in order not to know so much evil about myself. May He who is able provide the remedy.
7. While I was in the house of that lady I mentioned, where it was necessary to be careful and even reflect upon the vanity all the things of life bear with them (for I was very much esteemed and praised and was offered many things to which I could have truly become attached, had I looked out for myself), He who has true vision watched so as not to let me out of His hand....
8. Now that I mention "true vision" I recall the great trials persons whom God has brought to knowledge of the truth suffer in dealing with these earthly things, where so much is covered up, as the Lord once told me -- for many of the things I write about here do not come from my own head, but my heavenly Master tells them to me. The things I designate with the words "this I understood" or "the Lord said this to me" cause me great scrupulosity if I leave out even as much as a syllable. Hence if I don't recall everything exactly, I put it down as coming from myself; or also, some things are from me. I don't call mine what is good, for I already know that there is nothing good in me but what the Lord has given me without my meriting it. But when I say "coming from me," I mean not being made known to me through a revelation.
9. But alas, my God, how true it is that even in spiritual matters we often want to understand things through our own very twisted opinion of the truth, just as we also do in worldly things. We think we must measure our progress by the years in which we have practiced prayer and, it even seems, put a measure on Him who gives His gifts without any measure, when He so desires. He can give more to one in half a year than to another in many years! This is something I have seen so clearly in many persons that I'm amazed how we can even stop to consider it.
10. I firmly believe that anyone who has talent in discerning spirits and to whom the Lord may have given true humility will not be deceived in this matter. For such a person judges by the good effects, resolutions, and love; and the Lord gives light that these may be recognized. As a result this person looks at the improvement and progress of souls and not at their age. One person in half a year can gain more than another can in twenty years because, as I say, the Lord gives to whomever He wants and also to whoever is better disposed. I now see some young girls entering this house; because God has touched them and given them a little light and love (I mean that after a short while He gives them some gift), they do not wait for Him, or suffer any obstacle in their path, or even remember to eat. On account of Him who they know loves them, they close themselves up forever in a house without income, like someone who doesn't esteem her life. They give up everything; neither do they want their own will, nor does it even occur to them that they could be unhappy with such enclosure and austerity: together they all offer themselves as a sacrifice to God.
11. How willingly in this regard I give them the advantage over me; I should walk with shame before God! What His Majesty didn't succeed in doing with me in such a great number of years, from the time I began to practice prayer and He began to grant me favors, He has succeeded in doing with them in three months -- with some even three days -- after granting them much less than He did me, although He pays them well. Surely they are not unhappy about what they have done for Him.
12. By noting this, I would like us to recall the many years that have passed since we made profession and began to practice prayer, and not to disturb those who in a short time make more progress, causing them to turn back in order to walk at our pace; nor would I want to make those who fly like eagles with the favors God grants them to advance like fettered chickens. But let us fix our eyes on His Majesty; if we see they are humble, give them the rein; the Lord who grants them so many favors will not let them fall from the precipice. They themselves trust in God, for in this way the truth they know through faith benefits them. And is it that we do not trust them but want to measure them by our own measure conformed to our lowly spirits? Not so; but if we don't attain to the wonderful good effects and resolutions of their experience, let us humble ourselves and not condemn them; without experience one can misunderstand these things. In thinking that we are looking after their progress, we are avoiding and losing this occasion for progress ourselves. For the Lord places this occasion before us so as to humble us and that we might understand what we lack and how much closer to God and more detached these souls must be than are ours since His Majesty draws so close to them.
13. I don't mean, nor would I want it to be thought that I mean, anything else than that I would prefer a prayer practiced for only a short time and that produced marvelous effects that can be seen at once; for it is impossible without a powerful love to give up everything only so as to please God. Such prayer is better than prayer practiced for many years in which one never, either in the beginning or afterward, succeeds in resolving to do anything at all for God -- except some tiny little things, like grains of salt, that have no weight or bulk and could be carried in a sparrow's beak, and that we do not consider to be a mortification or a great effect of prayer. It's a pity we even know about some things we do for the Lord and pay attention to them, even though they be many.
I'm this way, and I forget the favors at every step. I do not say that His Majesty, being so good, will not highly regard these little deeds we perform. But I wouldn't want to pay attention to them or observe that I'm doing them, since they are nothing. Yet pardon me, my Lord, and don't blame me for having to console myself with something, for I don't serve You in anything. If I served You in great matters, I wouldn't be paying attention to trifles. Blessed are those persons who serve You with great deeds! If it were taken into account that I envy them and desire these deeds, I wouldn't be very far behind in pleasing You; but I'm not worth anything, my Lord. Give me worth Yourself since You love me so much.
14. On one of these days, when a brief from Rome was successfully obtained so that this monastery could exist without an income, it happened that I thought the accomplishment had cost me some difficulty. While being consoled in finding that the matter was ended and thinking of the trials I had experienced and praising the Lord for His having desired to make some use of me, I began to consider the things I had undergone. As a matter of fact, in each thing I did that seemed to be worth something, I found many faults and imperfections, and sometimes a lack of courage, and often little faith. For until the present moment, when I see the fulfillment of everything the Lord told me in regard to this house, I never succeeded in definitely believing that what the Lord told me would come about; but neither could I doubt that it would. It happened that often on the one hand the fulfillment seemed to me impossible, while on the other hand I couldn't doubt it -- I mean believe it would not come about. Finally, I discovered that the Lord for His part did everything good and that I did the bad; so I stopped thinking about the matter. I didn't want to recall it and thereby stumble upon so many of my faults. May He be blessed who when He so desires draws good out of everything, amen.
15. Well, I say that it is dangerous to count the number of years in which you have practiced prayer; even though humility may be present, I think there can remain a kind of feeling that you deserve something for the service. I don't mean that you don't gain merit and that you will not be well paid. But I consider it certain that spiritual persons who think that they deserve these delights of spirit for the many years they have practiced prayer will not ascend to the summit of the spiritual life. Isn't it enough that God take them by the hand to keep them from committing the offenses they did before they practiced prayer, without their wanting, so to speak, to sue God for money? I don't think it shows profound humility. Indeed, it could; but I consider it audacity. I don't think that I, who have little humility, would ever have dared to do so. Now it might be that since I have never served, I have never asked; perhaps if I had served, I would desire more than anyone that the Lord repay me.
16. I don't say that a soul will not grow or that God will not give this increase if its prayer has been humble, but I say that those years of service should be forgotten; for in comparison with one drop of the blood the Lord shed for us, everything we do is disgusting. And if in serving more we become more indebted, what is this we seek? For if we pay one maravedi of the debt, we are given a thousand ducats in return. Let us out of love for God set aside these judgments because they belong to Him. These comparisons are always bad, even in earthly matters; what must they amount to in matters that only God know about? And His Majesty showed it well when He paid as much to the workers who came last as to those who came first.
17. I've returned so often to write these three folios and so many days have passed -- for I have had and now have, as I said, little time -- that I had forgotten what I began to say, which was about this vision. I saw myself standing alone in prayer in a large field; surrounding me were many different types of people. All of them I think held weapons in their hands so as to harm me: some held spears; others, swords; others, daggers; and others, very long rapiers. In sum, I couldn't escape on any side without putting myself in danger of death; I was alone without finding a person to take my part. While my spirit was in this affliction, not knowing what to do, I lifted my eyes to heaven and saw Christ, not in heaven but quite far above me in the sky; He was holding out His hand toward me, and from there He protected me in such a way that I had no fear of all the people, nor could they harm me even though they wanted to.
18. This vision seems fruitless, but it greatly benefited me because I was given an understanding of its meaning. A little afterward I found myself almost in the midst of that battery, and I knew that the vision was a picture of the world; everything in the world, it seems, bears arms so as to injure the afflicted soul. I'm not referring to those who don't serve God well, or to honors, property, delights, and other similar things; for it is clear that when you least expect you are ensnared -- in any event, all these things strive to ensnare. But I'm referring to friends, relatives, and, what frightens me most, very good persons. I afterward found myself so oppressed by them all, while they thought they were doing good, that I didn't know how to defend myself or what to do.
19. Oh, God help me! Were I to speak of the different kinds of trials I experienced at this time, even after those I described before, how good would be the counsel to despise everything completely! It was the greatest persecution, it seems to me, of those I had undergone. I say that sometimes I found myself so constricted on every side that the only remedy I discovered was to raise my eyes to heaven and call upon God. I remembered well what I had seen in that vision. It profited me a great deal so that I didn't trust very much in anyone, for there is no stable help but in God. The Lord always sent me in these great trials a person on His side to lend me a hand, as He showed me in this vision, who was unattached to anything other than pleasing the Lord. He did this to sustain the little amount of virtue I had to desiring to serve Him. May You, Lord, be blessed forever!
20. Once while very disturbed and troubled, unable to recollect myself and in battle and strife with my own thoughts which were turning to imperfect matters -- finding that I didn't have the detachment I usually do -- I feared, since I saw I was so wretched, that the favors the Lord had granted me had been illusions. I experienced, in sum, a great darkness of soul. While I was in this affliction, the Lord began to speak to me. He told me not to be anxious, that in seeing myself in this condition I would understand how miserable I'd be if He withdrew from me, and that there is no security while we live in this flesh. He made me understand how worthwhile this war and strife is that merits such a reward (it seemed to me the Lord took pity on those who live in the world), that I should not think He had forgotten me, that He would never abandon me, but that it was necessary I do what I could. The Lord told me this with comforting compassion, and He said other things by which He showed me His great favor and which there is no reason for me to tell.
21. His Majesty, showing me deep love, often speaks these words to me: "Now you are Mine, and I am yours." The words I always have the custom of saying, and I think I say them truthfully, are: "What do I care about myself, Lord, when I care only about You?" These words and gifts make me so extraordinarily embarrassed when I recall what I am (as I have often said, I think, and now sometimes tell my confessor) that more courage is necessary to receive these favors than to undergo the severest trials. When they take place, I am almost completely forgetful of my deeds and am shown that I am wretched. This happens without any discursive activity of the intellect, for it also seems to me at times supernatural.
22. On occasion there come over me such ardent desires to receive Communion that I don't think they could be exaggerated. They came upon me one morning when it was raining so hard it seemed impossible to leave the house. When I was outside the house, I was already so outside myself with the desire for Communion that even should lances have been held to my heart I think I'd have gone into their midst; how much more into the midst of rain. When I reached the church a great rapture came upon me. It seemed to me I saw the heavens open, not just an entrance as I have seen before. A throne was shown to me, which at other times I've told your Reverence I've seen; and above it another throne where the Divinity was. Although I didn't see the Divinity, I knew with an indescribable knowledge that It was there. Seemingly some animals were holding up the throne. I think I have heard a description of these animals. I wondered if they were the Evangelists. But what the throne was like or who was on it, I didn't see -- only a great multitude of angels. They seemed to me to be incomparably more beautiful than those I had seen in heaven. I wondered if they were seraphim or cherubim because they were very different in glory. It seemed they were afire; the difference is great, as I've said. And the glory I then experienced in myself cannot be put in writing or described, nor could anyone who hadn't experienced it imagine what it is like. I understood that everything desirable is brought together there, yet I didn't see anything. I was told, I don't know by whom, that what I could do there was understand that I couldn't understand anything and reflect upon how in comparison with that glory everything else was nothing at all. As a consequence, my soul was afterward ashamed to see that it could be detained by any created thing; how much more if it were to become attached to it, for all things seemed to me like an ant-hill.
23. I was present at Mass and received Communion, but I don't know how it was possible. It seemed to me only a short time had passed. I was amazed when the clock struck and I found I had been in that rapture and glory for two hours. It seems this fire comes from above, from God's true love; for however much I may desire and seek and strive after it, I play no part in obtaining even a spark of it, save when His Majesty so desires, as I have often said. I was amazed afterward how this fire, when one is united to it, seems to consume the old man with his faults and lukewarmness and misery. Like the phoenix -- according to what I have read -- which after it is burned rises again from the same ashes, so afterward the soul becomes another, with different desires and great fortitude. It doesn't seem to be what it was before, but begins to walk on the Lord's path with new purity. While I was beseeching His Majesty that so it would be and that I would begin again to serve Him, He told me: "You have made a good comparison; see that you don't forget to strive always for improvement."
24. Once having the same doubt I just mentioned before, whether these visions were from God, the Lord appeared to me and said to me severely: "O children of the earth! How long will you be hard of heart?" He said that I should examine one thing in myself: whether I was totally surrendered to Him, or not; that if I was, I should believe He would not let me go astray. I became very distressed by that exclamation. In a most tender and comforting way He returned to say I shouldn't be distressed; that He already knew that for my part I wouldn't fail to dedicate myself entirely to His service; that everything I wanted would be done (and so what I then begged for was done); that I should behold the love for Him that was growing in me each day; that from this I could see that my experiences weren't from the devil; that I shouldn't think God would allow the devil to play such a role in the souls of His servants, or that the devil could give the quietude or clarity of understanding that I experienced. He made me realize that since so many persons, of such quality, told me these visions were from God I would be doing wrong in not believing them.
25. Once while reciting the psalm Quicumque vult I was given so clear an understanding of how there is only one God and three Persons that I was amazed and greatly consoled. It was extraordinarily beneficial to me to have further knowledge of the grandeurs of God and of His marvels. When I think about or discuss the Blessed Trinity, it seems I understand how it is possible; and this gives me great happiness.
26. One day, the feast of the Assumption of our Lady, Queen of Angels, the Lord desired to grant me the following favor; in a rapture He showed me her ascent to heaven, the happiness and solemnity with which she was received, and the place where she is. I wouldn't be able to describe how this happened. The glory my spirit experienced in seeing so much glory was magnificent. The effects of this favor were great. I was helped in having a deeper desire to undergo difficult trials, and I was left with a longing to serve our Lady since she deserved this so much.
27. While at a college of the Society of Jesus and while the Brothers in that house were receiving Communion, I saw a very richly made pallium above their heads. I saw this twice. When other persons were receiving Communion, I didn't see it.

CHAPTER 40
 
Continues with the same subject, telling of the great favors the Lord granted her. Good doctrine can be deduced from some of these favors; for, in addition to obeying, her main intention, as she said, has been to write about those favors that will be of benefit to souls. With this chapter the written account of her life comes to an end. May it be for the glory of the Lord, amen.
 
1. Once while in prayer the delight I felt within me was so great that, as someone who is unworthy of such good, I began to think about how I merited rather to be in that place I had seen was reserved for me in hell. For, as I said, I never forget the situation I there found myself in. With this reflection my soul began to grow more enkindled and there came upon me a spiritual rapture that I don't know how to describe. It seemed I was carried into and filled with that majesty I at other times understood. Within this majesty I was given knowledge of a truth that is the fulfillment of all truths. I don't know how to explain this because I didn't see anything. I was told without seeing anyone, but I clearly understood that it was Truth itself telling me: "This is no small thing I do for you, because it is one of the things for which you owe Me a great deal; for all the harm that comes to the world comes from its not knowing the truths of Scripture in clarity and truth; not one iota of Scripture will fall short." To me it seemed I had always believed this, and that all the faithful believed it. He told me: "Alas, daughter, how few there are who truthfully love Me! For if they loved Me, I would reveal to them my secrets. Do you know what it is to love Me truthfully? It is to understand that everything that is displeasing to Me is a lie. By the beneficial effects this understanding will cause in your soul you shall see clearly what you now do not understand."
2. And this I have afterward come to realize, may the Lord be praised. For ever since then, that which I observe as not directed toward the service of God seems to me to be such vanity and deception that I wouldn't know how to describe the manner in which I understand this. Nor would I know how to describe the grief caused me by those who I see are in darkness about this truth, or, along with this, how to describe many other advantages that I shall mention here. The Lord spoke to me a particular word in this rapture by which He showed me extraordinary favor. I don't know how this came about, because I didn't see anything; but I was left with a feeling of indescribable good fortune and with the greatest and most authentic fortitude in using all my strength to carry out the least part of Sacred Scripture. It seems to me that no obstacle could cross my path that I wouldn't overcome.
3. From this divine Truth, which showed itself to me, there was engraved upon me, without my knowing how or what, a truth that gives me a new reverence toward God; for it gives knowledge of His majesty and power in an indescribable way: I know that this majesty and power are something great. There was left in me a keen desire to speak only those things that are very true, that reach beyond what is dealt with here in the world; and so I began to experience the pain of living in the world. This experience left me feeling great tenderness, consolation, and humility. I think that, without my understanding how, the Lord gave me very much with this favor. I felt no suspicion that it was an illusion. I didn't see anything, but I understood the great blessing there is in not paying attention to what doesn't bring us closer to God. Thus I understood that the Lord gave me understanding of what Truth itself is.
4. All I have mentioned I have come to know sometimes through locutions, at other times without them. Some things I understood more clearly than I understand what is told me in words. I understood extraordinary truths about this Truth, more than if many learned men had taught me. I don't think they could ever have impressed truth upon me in this way or made me understand so clearly the vanity of this world.
This truth, which I say was given to my understanding, is in itself truth, and it is without beginning or end; all other truths depend upon this truth, just as all other loves depend upon this love, and all other grandeurs upon this grandeur -- although this statement is obscure if compared to the clear understanding the Lord wanted me to have. And what power this Majesty appears to have since in so short a time He leaves such an abundant increase and things so marvelous impressed upon the soul! O my Grandeur and Majesty! What are You doing, my all-powerful Lord? Look upon whom You bestow such sovereign favors! Don't You recall that this soul has been an abyss of lies and a sea of vanities, and all through my own fault? For even though You gave me the natural temperament to abhor the lie, I myself in dealing with many things have lied. How do You bear it; my God? How is such great consolation and favor compatible with one who so poorly deserves this from You?
5. Once while I was reciting with all the Sisters the hours of the Divine Office, my soul suddenly became recollected; and it seemed to me to be like a brightly polished mirror, without any part on the back or sides or top or bottom that wasn't totally clear. In its center Christ, our Lord, was shown to me, in the way I usually see Him. It seemed to me I saw Him clearly in every part of my soul, as though in a mirror. And this mirror also -- I don't know how to explain it -- was completely engraved upon the Lord Himself by means of a very loving communication I wouldn't know how to describe. I know that this vision is very beneficial to me each time I remember it, especially after receiving Communion. I was given understanding of what it is for a soul to be in mortal sin. It amounts to clouding this mirror with mist and leaving it black; and thus this Lord cannot be revealed or seen, even though He is always present giving us being. And I understood that heresies amount to breaking the mirror; which is much worse than its being darkened. The way in which this is seen is very different from telling about it because it can be poorly described. But it brought me much profit and caused me grief for the times in which through my sins I so darkened my soul that I couldn't see this Lord.
6. I think this vision is advantageous to recollected persons, in teaching them to consider the Lord as very deep within their souls; such a thought is much more alluring and fruitful than thinking of Him as outside oneself, as I mentioned at other times. And some books on prayer tell about where one must seek God. Particularly, the glorious St. Augustine speaks about this for neither in the market place nor in pleasures nor anywhere else that he sought God did he find Him as he did when he sought Him within himself. Within oneself, very clearly, is the best place to look; and it's not necessary to go to heaven, nor any further than our own selves; for to do so is to tire the spirit and distract the soul, without gaining as much fruit.
7. There is one thing I want to advise here, in case someone should experience it. It happens in deep rapture that after the time is past in which the soul is in union (for when it is in union the faculties are totally absorbed, and this doesn't last long, as I said), the soul remains recollected and cannot yet return to itself in exterior things; but the two faculties, the memory and the intellect, are left almost delirious and mad. This I say happens sometimes, especially in the beginning. I think it proceeds from the fact that our natural weakness cannot bear such spiritual force, and the imagination is weakened. I know that it happens to some persons. I would consider it advisable that they force themselves to stop their prayer at that time and recover at another time what they miss; provided they do not try to regain this all at once, because this state could end up being harmful. And there is experience of such harm and of how fitting it is to consider what our health is capable of.
8. However, experience and a spiritual master are necessary because once the soul has reached those boundaries many things occur about which it is necessary to have someone to talk to. If after one has looked for someone, no one is found, the Lord will not fail; He hasn't failed me in spite of what I am. I believe there are few who have arrived at the experience of so many things. If there isn't anyone with experience, there is no remedy at all; because lacking experience, the master will only disturb and afflict the soul. But the Lord will also take this into account. Hence it is necessary, especially in the case of women, to discuss this with one's confessor, and that he be a qualified one. I've said all this before, as well as, perhaps, all that I'm now saying (for I don't recall well); and I say it now because I find it is very important. There are many more women than men to whom the Lord grants these favors. This I heard from the saintly Friar Peter of Alcántara -- and I too have observed it -- who said that women make much more progress along this path than men do. He gave excellent reasons for this, all in favor of women; but there's no need to mention them here.
9. Once while in prayer I was shown quickly, without my seeing any form -- but it was a totally clear representation -- how all things are seen in God and how He holds them all in Himself. How to put this in writing I don't know. But it was deeply impressed upon my soul, and it is one of the great favors the Lord has granted me and one of those that have most embarrassed me and made me ashamed when I recalled the sins I committed. I believe that had the Lord been pleased that I should have seen this before and that those who offend Him should have seen it, neither I nor they would have had the heart or dared to offend Him. I say "it seemed to me," without being able to affirm that I saw anything; but something must have been seen since I shall be able to draw a comparison. But the vision is seen in so subtle and delicate a manner that the intellect probably doesn't attain to it; or I don't know how to explain these visions that don't seem to be imaginative. Some of them must have something of the imaginative. But since the faculties are in rapture they are unable afterward to describe how the Lord is represented there and how He desires that they enjoy Him.
10. Let us say, to make the comparison, that the Divinity is like a very clear diamond, much greater than all the world; or like a mirror, as I said referring to the soul in that other vision, except that it is a mirror in so sublime a way that I wouldn't know how to exaggerate this. And we could say that everything we do is visible in this diamond since it is of such a kind that it contains all things within itself; there is nothing that escapes its magnitude. It was a frightening experience for me to see in so short a time so many things joined together in this diamond, and it is most saddening, each time I recall, to see appearing in that pure brilliance things as ugly as were my sins. It happens that whenever I recall this, I fail to know how I can bear it; as a result I am then left with such shame that I don't think I know where to hide. Oh, who could explain this to those who commit very indecent and ugly sins, that they might recall that these sins are not hidden and that God is rightly aware of them since they take place squarely in the presence of the Majesty? And we act so disrespectfully in front of Him! I saw how truly hell is deserved through only one mortal sin because one cannot understand how dreadfully serious it is to commit this sin before such awesome Majesty and how far from what He is are things of this sort. So His mercy is seen more clearly since even when we understand all this He bears with us.
11. It made me reflect that if something like this so frightens the soul, what will the day of judgment be like when this Majesty will be shown to us clearly and we shall see the offenses we have committed? Oh, God help me, what blindness this is that I have borne! Many times I have been frightened over this vision of what I have written. Your Reverence should not be surprised about it, but rather about how I can go on living after seeing these things and then looking at myself. May He be blessed forever who has put up with so much from me!
12. Once while I was in prayer with deep recollection, delight, and quiet, it seemed to me I was surrounded by angels and very close to God. I began to beseech His Majesty for the Church. A revelation was given me of the great good that would be done by a religious order in the latter times and of the fortitude with which its members would sustain the faith.
13. Once while I was praying near the Blessed Sacrament, a saint appeared to me whose order was somewhat fallen. He held in his hands a great book. He opened it and told me to read some large and very legible letters. This is what they said. "In the time to come this order will flourish; it will have many martyrs."
14. At another time while I was at Matins in the choir, there were shown or represented to me six or seven members -- it seems there were that many -- of the same order, holding swords in their hands. I think this meant that they will defend the faith. For at another time while I was at prayer, my spirit was carried off to where it seemed to be in a large field in which many were in combat, and those belonging to this order were fighting with great fervor. Their faces were beautiful and very much aglow. They conquered many, throwing them to the ground; others, they killed. It seemed to me this battle was against the heretics.
15. I sometimes saw this glorious saint, and he told me a few things and thanked me for praying for his order and promised to recommend me to the Lord. I'm not naming the orders (if the Lord were pleased that they be known, He would declare them), lest others be offended. But each order, or, rather, each member must strive that through his instrumentality the Lord might make his order so prosperous that it will be of service to God in the extreme need the Church is now in. Happy the lives lost for such a purpose!
16. A person once asked me to beg God to let him know if it would be to the Lord's service for him to accept a bishopric. The Lord told me after I received Communion: "When he understands in all truthfulness and clarity that real lordship consists in possessing nothing, then he will be able to accept it." With these words He indicated that anyone who is about to receive a prelacy must be far from desiring or wanting it, or at least from striving after it.
17. The Lord granted and continues ordinarily to grant these favors, and many others, to this sinner. It doesn't seem to me necessary to mention these others, since from what was said my soul can be understood as can also the spirit the Lord has given me. May He be blessed forever who has taken such care of me.
18. Once in comforting me He told me with much love that I shouldn't be anxious, that in this life we cannot always be in a stable condition, that sometimes the soul will experience fervor and at other times be without it, that sometimes it will have disturbances and at other times have quiet, and again temptations; but that it should hope in Him and not be afraid.
19. One day I was wondering if it was an attachment for me to find satisfaction in being with persons with whom I discuss my soul and whom I love, or with those who I see are great servants of God since it consoled me to be with them. The Lord told me that if a sick person who was in danger of death thought a doctor was bringing about a cure, that sick person wouldn't be virtuous for failing to thank and love the doctor; that if it hadn't been for these persons what would I have done; that conversation with good persons is not harmful, but that my words should always be well weighed and holy, and that I shouldn't fail to converse with them; that doing so is beneficial rather than harmful. This consoled me greatly because sometimes, since conversing with them seemed to me to be an attachment, I didn't want to talk to them at all.
Always in all matters this Lord counseled me even to the point of telling me how I should behave with the weak and with certain persons. Never does he neglect me.
20. Sometimes I worry because I see I do so little in His service and that I must necessarily take time for a body as weak and wretched as mine, more than I would want. Once I was in prayer, and the hour for going to bed came; I was feeling many pains and had to induce the usual vomiting. Since I saw I was so bound to myself and that my spirit on the other hand wanted more time, I got so wearied I began to weep freely and grow distressed. (This has happened not only once but, as I say, often.) It seems to me I became angry with myself in such a way that I then truly hated myself. But usually I know I don't hold myself in abhorrence, nor do I fail to do what I see is necessary for myself. And may it please the Lord that I do not care for myself more than is necessary, as sometime I'm afraid I do. This time of which I'm speaking, the Lord appeared to me and greatly comforted me and told me I should suffer and do these things for love of Him because they were now necessary for my life. So I think I was never afflicted afterward, because I'm determined to serve this Lord and my comforter with all my strength; even though He allowed me to suffer a little. He consoled me in such a way that I don't do anything in desiring trials. So now it seems to me there is no other reason for living than to suffer trials, and this is what I most willingly beg of God. Sometimes I say earnestly to Him; "Lord, either to die or to suffer; I don't ask anything else for myself." I am consoled to hear the clock strike, for at the passing away of that hour of life it seems to me I am drawing a little closer to the vision of God.
21. At other times I am in such a condition that I neither feel like living nor have any mind to die, but I experience a lukewarmness and darkness in everything, with many trials as I've said I often do. And although the Lord desired that these favors He grants me be publicly known, it has been a comfort to me that they have not been made known through any fault of mine. His Majesty told me some years ago that so it must be, for I was very worried. And up to the present time I have suffered no small amount, as your Reverence knows, because each one gives them their own interpretation. I took extreme care not to tell anyone but my confessors or persons who, I learned from these confessors, knew about them. And I did this not out of humility but because, as I said, it is even painful for me to tell my confessors. Now, glory to God (even though many criticize me, and with true zeal, and others are afraid to talk to me or even hear my confession, and others say numerous things against me), I am bothered very little by it all since I understand that by this means the Lord has desired to provide a cure for many souls (because I have seen it clearly and recall how much the Lord will suffer for only one soul). I don't know if this public knowledge of these favors is partly the reason His Majesty placed me in this little corner so enclosed, where, according to what I thought, I would, as one dead, no longer be remembered. But things haven't turned out quite as I had wanted, for I am forced to speak to some persons. Yet since I'm not where I can be seen, it seems the Lord has brought me to a refuge which I hope, in His Majesty, will be safe.
22. Since I am among a few holy companions and am not in the world, I observe as though from up high and am really little bothered by what they say or know about me. Moreover, I would like some soul to profit a little by all that can be said about me. Since I have been living in this house, the Lord has been pleased that all my desires converge upon this one desire. And He has given me a kind of sleep in life, or it almost always seems to me that I am dreaming what I see. I am aware in myself of neither happiness nor pain, however great. If certain things do give me either of these, the happiness or pain passes so quickly I marvel, and the feeling left me is that it was like a dream. This is the complete truth; for even though afterward I may want to rejoice over that happiness or be sad about that pain, it is not in my power to do so; just as a prudent person is unable to delight in or grieve over a dream that was had. The Lord has now awakened my soul from that which, because I was not mortified or dead to the things of the world, caused me such feelings; and His Majesty does not want my soul to become blind again.
23. This is the way in which I now live, my Lord and Father. May your Reverence beg God that He either take me to Himself or show me how to serve Him. May it please His Majesty that what is here written be of some benefit to your Reverence, for it was difficult to do on account of the small amount of time I had. But the difficulty will have proved well worthwhile if I have managed to say something that may bring someone to praise the Lord, even if only once; with this I would feel repaid even though your Reverence then burns it.
24. I wouldn't want you to do that until the three persons known by your Reverence have seen it, since they are and have been my confessors. If this account of my life is badly done, it will be a good thing if they lose their high opinion of me; if it is done well, they are good and learned men, and I know they will see where it comes from and praise Him who told it through me.
May His Majesty always keep your Reverence in His hands and make you so great a saint that with your spirit and light you may illumine this miserable woman who has little humility and is very bold in having dared to undertake the task of writing things so sublime. May it please the Lord that I did not err in doing so since my intention and desire was to do what was right and to obey, and that through me He might receive some praise, which is what I have been beseeching Him for many years. Since I do not have the deeds that praise Him, I have dared to recount this dissipated life of mine, although I haven't spent any more care or time on this account than was necessary to put it in writing and record as clearly and truthfully as I could what has taken place in me.
May it please the Lord, since He is powerful and can hear me if He wants, that I might succeed in doing His will in everything. May His Majesty not allow this soul to be lost, which, with so many artifices, in so many ways, and so often, He has rescued from hell and brought to Himself. Amen.
