To the Very Magnificent and Reverend Señor Gaspar de Salazar, rector of the house of the Society of Jesus in Cuenca. My lord and my Father.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor always, amen. I am delighted that the occasion has arisen in which I can send you news of myself, since you are so neglectful in sending me news about yourself. May it please our Lord that you enjoy the health I beg of him for you.
2. Many days and even months had gone by without my having received a letter from you filled with good counsel and advice. Your letter came just at the right time, for I was greatly encouraged, although your prayers must have brought me even greater benefit. I want you to know that in this house the Lord has bestowed so many favors that I can assure you I no longer have any more reason to be distressed over resistance to obedience and recollection here than at St. Joseph's. It seems the Lord is giving these souls so many graces altogether that I am stupefied. So was Father Visitator who found nothing to correct in the visitation he made a month ago. Would you give thanks to the Lord for that. In the monastery of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel, he appointed discalced friars as prior, subprior, porter, and sacristan. And one of them, who is very saintly, has been the confessor here for some time. He has done much good; and all of them are to my liking.
3. This decision has been an exceptionally good one. If this house were entrusted completely to them -- as I hope in the Lord it will be -- there would be no need for me to stay here any longer. Pray for this, that a proper remedy will be found for everything. Up to the present I have had many trials and duties, and in the winter poor health, for this house aggravates my illnesses. I consider it all worthwhile when I see the favors that His Majesty has granted me. I had a strong desire that you might know about these things, and if I could see you it would be a great consolation to me. (Pass on to the next page, for I got a bad piece of paper.) May the Lord do his will in all things.
4. The lord mayor here, whom I very much want to please, came to urge me -- and afterward continued pressing me -- to ask you that a monastery there (I think he said they were discalced, but anyway you have much influence there) might accept a daughter of Juan de Buedo and Leonor de Hermosa for the religious life. They say that the young lady and her parents meet all the requirements. Would you find out if this is so and, out of love for God, help her. You would be rendering a service to God, and a great favor to me, for I cannot accept her in any of our monasteries; the necessary disposition is lacking.
5. Everyone is doing very well in Malagón. Brianda de San José is now prioress; the former prioress has returned to her house here. I'm writing no more for I am certain you will do all you can for me. I am at present enjoying better health than usual. Don't forget to keep me in your prayers, and I, though wretched, will do the same for you.
My confessor is Padre Lárez.
Today is 13 February 1573.
Your honor's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
