1. I often reflect, my Lord, that if there is something by which life can endure being separated from You, it is solitude. For the soul rests in the quiet of solitude; yet, since it is not completely free for the enjoyment of solitude, the torment is often doubled. But the torment arising from the obligation to deal with creatures and from not being allowed to be alone with one's Creator makes the soul consider that first torment a delight. But why is this, my God, that quiet tires the soul that aims only at pleasing You? Oh, powerful love of God, how different are your effects from those of the world's love! This latter love doesn't want company since company would seem to oblige it to give up what it possesses. In the case of the love of my God, the more lovers that love knows there are, the more it increases; and so its joys are tempered by seeing that not all enjoy that good. O my God, what is this that happens: in the greatest favors and consolations coming from You, the memory grieves over the many there are who don't want these consolations and over those who will lose them forever! So the soul looks for ways to find company, and willingly sets aside its joy when it thinks it can be of some help that others might strive to enjoy it.
2. But, my heavenly Father, wouldn't it be more worthwhile to leave aside these desires until a time when the soul has less experience of Your favors, and now be completely occupied in enjoying You? Oh, my Jesus, how great is the love You bear the children of the earth, for the greatest service one can render You is to leave You for their sake and their benefit -- and then You are possessed more completely. For although the will isn't so satisfied through enjoyment, the soul rejoices because it is pleasing You. And it sees that while we live this mortal life, earthly joys are uncertain, even when they seem to be given by You, if they are not accompanied by love of neighbor. Whoever fails to love their neighbor, fails to love You, my Lord, since we see You showed the very great love You have for the children of Adam by shedding so much blood.
