CHAPTER 4
 
Urges the observance of the rule and discusses three things that are important for the spiritual life. Explains the first of these, which is love of neighbor, and how particular friendships do harm.
 
1. Now, daughters, you have seen the great task we have undertaken [for the prelate and bishop who is your superior and for the order, already included in what was mentioned, since all is for the good of the Church; and to pray for the Church is an obligation]. What do you think we must be like if we are not to be considered very bold by God and the world? Clearly, we must work hard, and it helps a great deal to have lofty thoughts so that we will exert ourselves and make our deeds comply with our thoughts. For if we strive to observe our rule and constitutions very carefully, I hope in the Lord that our prayers will be heard. I am not beseeching you to do something new, my daughters, but only that we observe what we profess; to observe this is our vocation and obligation -- although there are many degrees of observance.
2. Our primitive rule states that we must pray without ceasing. If we do this with all the care possible -- for unceasing prayer is the most important aspect of the rule -- the fasts, the disciplines, and the silence the order commands will not be wanting. For you already know that if prayer is to be genuine, it must be helped by these other things; prayer and comfortable living are incompatible.
3. It is about prayer that you asked me to say something, and I beg you that in recompense for what I am going to say you eagerly do what I have said up until now, and read it often. Before I say anything about interior matters, that is, about prayer, I shall mention some things that are necessary for those who seek to follow the way of prayer; so necessary that even if these persons are not very contemplative, they can be far advanced in the service of the Lord if they possess these things. And if they do not possess them, it is impossible for them to be very contemplative. And if they think they are, they are being highly deceived. May the Lord help me speak of these things, and may he teach me what I am about to say so that it may be for His glory, amen.
4. Do not think, my friends and daughters, that I shall burden you with many things; please God, we shall do what our holy fathers established and observed, for by walking this path they themselves established they merited this title we give them. It would be wrong to seek another way or try to learn about this path from anyone else. I shall enlarge on only three things, which are from our own constitutions, for it is very important that we understand how much the practice of these three things helps us to possess inwardly and outwardly the peace our Lord recommended so highly to us. The first of these is love for one another; the second is detachment from all created things; the third is true humility, which, even though I speak of it last, is the main practice and embraces all the others.
5. About the first, love for one another, it is most important that we have this, for there is nothing annoying that is not suffered easily by those who love one another -- a thing would have to be extremely annoying before causing any displeasure. And if this commandment were observed in the world as it should be, I think such love would be very helpful for the observance of the other commandments. But, because of either excess or defect, we never reach the point of observing this commandment perfectly.
It may seem that having excessive love among ourselves could not be evil, but such excess carries with it so much evil and so many imperfections that I don't think anyone will believe this save the one who has been an eyewitness. The devil lays many snares here, for this excess is hardly noticed by persons having consciences that deal only roughly with pleasing God, and the excess even seems to them virtuous; but those who are interested in perfection have a deep understanding of this excessive love, because little by little it takes away the strength of will to be totally occupied in loving God.
6. I believe this excessive love must be found among women even more than among men; and the harm it does in the community is well known. It gives rise to the following: failing to love equally all the others; feeling sorry about any affront to the friend; desiring possessions so as to give her gifts; looking for time to speak with her, and often so as to tell her that you hold her dear and other trifling things rather than about your love for God. For these great friendships are seldom directed toward helping one love God more. On the contrary, I think the devil gets them started so as to promote factions in religious orders. For when love is in the service of His Majesty, the will does not proceed with passion but proceeds by seeking help to conquer other passions.
7. I should like that there be many of these friendships where there is a large community, but in this house where there are no more than thirteen -- nor must there be any more -- all must be friends, all must be loved, all must be held dear, all must be helped. Watch out for these friendships, for love of the Lord, however holy they may be; even among brothers they can be poisonous. I see no benefit in them. And if the friends are relatives, the situation in much worse -- it's a pestilence! And believe me, daughters, even though this kind of talk seems extreme, great perfection and great peace lie in keeping my advice; and many occasions are removed from those who are not strong. But if the will should be inclined to one more than to another (this cannot be helped, for it is natural and we are often drawn to love the worst one if that person is endowed with more natural graces), let us be careful not to allow ourselves to be dominated by that affection. Let us love the virtues and interior good, and always studiously avoid paying attention to this exterior element.
8. Let us not condescend, oh daughters, to allow our wills to be slaves to anyone, save to the One who bought it with His blood. Be aware that, without understanding how, you will find yourselves so attached that you will be unable to manage the attachment. Oh, God help me, the silly things that come from such attachment are too numerous to be counted. And because these things are so minute that only the one who sees such friendship will understand and believe what is said about them, there's no reason to say any more here -- except that such a friendship is bad when found in anyone; but when found in the prioress it's a pestilence.
9. To break away from these friendships involving a particular fondness, great care is necessary at the outset of the friendship. This breaking away should be done delicately and lovingly rather than harshly. In providing a remedy it is important that the friends avoid being together and speaking to each other save at the designated hours. This would be in conformity with the custom we now follow, which is that we are not to be together but each one alone in her own cell, as the rule commands. At St. Joseph's the nuns should be excused from having a common workroom, for although having one is a laudable custom, silence is better observed when each nun is by herself; and to get used to solitude is a great help for prayer. Since prayer must be the foundation of this house, it is necessary that we strive to dedicate ourselves to what most helps us in prayer.
10. Returning to the subject of our loving one another, it seems pointless to be recommending this love. For are there persons who can be so like brutes that they will not love each other even though they must always deal with and be in the company of one another and have no dealings and no recreation with persons outside the house and believe that God loves them and they Him, since for His sake they have left everything? I say this especially since virtue always inspires love, and I hope in His Majesty that those living in this house will with the help of God always be virtuous. So, in my opinion, I don't have to recommend this love a great deal.
11. What I would like to say a little about now is how this love for one another must be practiced. I would like to speak also of the nature of this virtuous love -- which is the love I want practiced here -- and how we know if we have this love; for our Lord recommended it so highly and so urgently to His apostles. What I say will be in conformity with my dullness of mind; and if in other books you find a detailed explanation don't take anything from me, for perhaps I don't know what I'm talking about.
12. Two kinds of love are what I'm dealing with: One kind is spiritual, because it in no way seems to stir sensuality or affect the tenderness of our nature so as to take away purity. The other is spiritual mixed with our sensuality and weakness or good love, for it seems to be licit, as is love for our relatives and friends. I have already said something about it.
13. I want to speak now about the love that is spiritual, that which is not affected by any passion; where passion is present the good order is thrown into complete disorder. And if we deal with virtuous persons discreetly and moderately, especially confessors, we will benefit. But if you should become aware that the confessor is turning toward some vanity, be suspicious about everything and in no way carry on conversations with him even though they may seem to be good, but make your confession briefly and bring it to a conclusion. And it would be best to tell the prioress that your soul doesn't get on well with him and change confessors. That would be the most proper thing to do -- if you can do it without hurting his reputation.
14. In similar cases and others as well, in which the devil could ensnare one in many difficulties and in which one does not know what counsel to take, the best thing to do is try to speak with some learned person; when necessary there should be the freedom to do this. Make your confession to him and do what he tells you to do about the matter; for since one must provide some remedy, one could fall into great error. How many mistakes have been made in the world by doing things without counsel, especially in matters that could be harmful to someone! Failing to provide a remedy cannot be allowed; for unless the devil is quickly cut short, the effect will not be something of minor importance when he begins to interfere. Thus what I have said about trying to speak with another confessor is what is best to do, provided that there be an opportunity; and I hope in the Lord there will be.
15. Keep in mind that this is a very important point, for such friendship is dangerous, harmful, and a hell for all the Sisters. I say that you must not wait until you recognize that serious evil is present, but you should in the beginning cut the relationship short by every possible and knowable means. In good conscience you can do so. But I hope in the Lord that He will not permit that persons who must always be engaged in prayer will be able to love anyone who is not the Lord's great servant. That they ought not is very certain -- or else they have neither the prayer nor the perfection that is in conformity with our goal here. For if they see that a person doesn't understand their language and doesn't love to speak of God, they will not be able to love him, because he will not be like them. If he is like them, since the opportunities for these servants of God to engage in such friendship are so few, he will not want to disturb them; or he will be a simpleton.
16. Now I have begun to speak about this matter because, as I have said, the harm the devil can here cause is great, and only very slowly is it recognized; thus perfection can be gradually vitiated without one's knowing why. For if this confessor wants to allow room for vanity, because he himself is vain, he makes little of it even in others. May God, because of who He is, deliver us from such things. A situation like this would be enough to disturb all the nuns because their consciences tell them the opposite of what their confessor does. And if they are restricted to only one confessor, they don't know what to do or how to be at peace. For the one who should be calming them and providing a remedy is the one who is causing the harm. There must be a lot of these kinds of affliction in some places. It makes me feel great pity, and so you shouldn't be surprised if I have tried to explain this danger to you.

CHAPTER 5
 
Continues on the subject of confessors. Speaks of the importance of their being learned.
 
1. May the Lord, because of who He is, not allow anyone in this house to undergo the trial that has been mentioned; that is, to find oneself in this affliction of body and soul. Nor may He allow a situation in which if the prioress gets along well with the confessor no one dares to speak either to him about her or to her about him. The result of this state of affairs will be the temptation to omit the confession of very serious sins for fear of being disturbed. O God help me, what harm the devil can cause here, and how dearly the nuns will pay for this restriction and concern about honor! For while they think that by dealing with no more than one confessor they are doing something great for religious life and the reputation of the monastery, the devil manages in this way to catch souls, since he cannot in any other. If they ask to go to another confessor, it immediately seems as if the peace and harmony of religious life will be lost. Or if the desired confessor is not from the same order, merely speaking with him, even though he may be a saint [Jerome], is taken as an affront by the others. [Praise God very much, daughters, for this freedom that you have, since you are able here to speak to others -- though not too many others -- besides your ordinary confessors, and these will give you light about everything.]
2. I ask, for the love of the Lord, that this holy freedom be allowed by the one who is superior. May she always ask permission from the bishop or the provincial that, besides speaking with the ordinary confessors, she and all the others might sometimes speak and discuss their souls with learned persons, especially if the confessors, however good, may not be learned. Learning is a great help for shedding light upon every matter. It will be possible to find both learning and goodness in some persons. And the more the Lord favors you in prayer, the more necessary it will be that your prayer and good works have a good foundation.
3. You already know that the cornerstone must be a good conscience and that with all your strength you must strive to free yourselves even from venial sins and seek what is the most perfect. It will seem to you that any confessor knows this, but that is misleading. It happened to me that I spoke about matters of conscience with a confessor who had gone through the whole course of theology, and he did me a great deal of harm by telling me that some matters didn't amount to anything. I know that he didn't intend to misinform me and had no reason to, but he simply didn't know any more. And the same thing happened to me with two or three others, besides the one I mentioned.
4. Having true light at our disposal for the sake of keeping the law of God with perfection is all our good; prayer is well founded on such light. Without this strong foundation and if the Sisters are not given freedom to confess and discuss their souls with persons like those I have mentioned, the whole building will be wobbly. [Thus they must speak to spiritual and learned persons. If the appointed confessor is not spiritual and learned, they should at times seek out others. And if, perhaps, they receive orders not to confess to others, they can speak outside of confession to the kind of person I mentioned.] And I dare say more, that even if the confessor has all the qualities I mentioned, it is good sometimes to consult others because it is still possible for him to be mistaken; and it is important that not all be misled by him. One should seek always that there be nothing contrary to obedience, for there are ways and means for everything. And so it is good that in all possible ways one seek such counsel that is so valuable to souls.
5. All this that I have said should be of concern to the prioress. So I beg her again that, since no other consolation is sought here than the soul's, she should seek the soul's consolation by doing what I said. For there are different paths along which God leads souls, and one confessor perhaps will not know them all. I assure you there will not be lacking holy persons who will want to speak to you about your souls and bring you comfort -- if your souls are what they should be -- even though you may be poor. He who sustains your bodies will awaken someone and give him the desire to enlighten your souls and bring a remedy to this evil that I fear. For even if the devil tempts a confessor so as to deceive him about some doctrine, he will be careful and consider with caution everything he does when he knows that you speak to others.
Once this entrance has been taken away from the devil, I hope in God he will not find another one in this house. So I beg the bishop, whoever he may be, for love of the Lord, to allow the Sisters this freedom and not take it away from them when the persons they consult possess learning and goodness, a fact they can easily get to know in a city as small as this.
6. I have seen and understood what I have mentioned here, and discussed it with learned and holy persons who have considered what was most suitable for this house so that there would be progress along the path of perfection. Among dangers, which are always present as long as we live, we find that this one is a lesser one. The vicar should never have a free hand to come and go, nor should the confessor have this freedom. Rather, they should be protecting the recollection and decorum of the house and its progress, both interior and exterior, and should tell the bishop when there is some fault; but neither the vicar nor the confessor should be the superior.
7. This is our practice at present -- but not merely because of my opinion. The bishop we now have, under whose obedience we are (for many reasons obedience was not given to the Order), is a person fond of religious life and holiness and is a great servant of God. (His name is Don Alvaro de Mendoza; he is of high nobility and lineage and very fond of favoring this house in every way.) He gathered persons of learning, spirituality, and experience together in order to deal with this point; and freedom was decided upon. It is only right that the superiors who follow should hold to this opinion; it was decided upon by such good persons and sought from God with many prayers for enlightenment about the best thing to do. And from what has been known up until the present, this practice certainly is the best thing. May the Lord be pleased to preserve it always since it is for His greater glory, amen.

CHAPTER 6
 
Returns to the subject already begun, that of perfect love.
 
1. I have digressed enough, but what was said is so important that anyone who understands it will not blame me. Let us return now to the love that it is good for us to have, that which I say is purely spiritual. I don't know if I know what I am saying. At least I don't think it's necessary to speak much about this love, because few have it. Let the one to whom the Lord has given it praise Him very much because such a person must have reached the highest perfection. Anyway, I want to say a little about this love. Doing so will perhaps be of some benefit; for when virtue is placed before our eyes, the one who desires it grows fond of it and seeks to gain it.
2. May it please God that I understand this love; and even more, that I know how to speak of it. For I don't think I know which love is spiritual, or when sensual love is mixed with spiritual love, nor do I know why I want to speak about this spiritual love. My situation is like that of one who hears others speaking in the distance but doesn't understand what they are saying. So it is that sometimes I don't think I understand what I'm saying, but the Lord wills that it be well said. If at other times what I say is nonsense, that is what is most natural to me -- not being correct in anything.
3. Now it seems to me that those whom God brings to a certain clear knowledge love very differently than do those who have not reached it. This clear knowledge is about the nature of the world, that there is another world, about the difference between the one and the other, that the one is eternal and the other a dream; or about the nature of loving the Creator and loving the creature (and this seen through experience, which is entirely different from merely thinking about it or believing it); or this knowledge comes from seeing and feeling what is gained by the one love and lost by the other, and what the Creator is and what the creature is, and from many other things that the Lord teaches to anyone who wants to be taught by Him in prayer, or whom His Majesty desires to teach.
4. It may be, Sisters, that you will think it useless for me to speak of this love and that you will say everybody already knows these things I have mentioned. May it please the Lord that this be so, that you know them in such a way that they be important to you and impressed deep within your being. For if you have this knowledge, you will see that I do not lie in saying that whoever the Lord brings to the state of perfection has this love. The persons the Lord brings to this state are generous souls, majestic souls. They are not content with loving something as wretched as these bodies, however beautiful they may be, however attractive. Yes, it pleases them to see such bodies, and they praise the Creator; but, no, they do not stop there. I mean stop in such a way that they love these things. It would seem to them that they were loving something of no substance, loving a shadow. They would feel chagrin, and they wouldn't have the courage, without great shame, to tell God they love Him.
5. You will tell me that such perfect persons do not know how to love or repay the love others have for them -- at least, they care little about being loved. At times nature suddenly rejoices at being loved, but then when there persons return to themselves they see that this is foolish, unless the souls of the others will benefit either by doctrine or by prayer. All other affection wearies these persons, for they understand that no benefit comes from it and that it could be harmful. But this does not make these persons ungrateful or unwilling to repay the love of others by recommending them to God. They entrust to the Lord the care of those who love them, for they understand that the love comes from Him. It doesn't seem there is anything within themselves to love, and they immediately think they are loved because these others love God. They leave it to His Majesty to repay those who love them, and they beg Him to do so. In this way they remain free, for it seems to them that repaying the love is not their business. And, in fact, I think at times that if love does not come from those persons who can help us gain the blessings of the perfect, there would be great blindness in this desire to be loved.
6. Now, note well that when we desire love from some person, there is always a kind of seeking our own benefit or satisfaction, and these perfect persons have already trampled underfoot all the good things and comforts the world has to offer them. Their consolations are of a kind that even though they may desire them, so to speak, they cannot tolerate having them apart from God or from speaking of Him. For what benefit can come to them from being loved?
7. Since this truth is made known to them, they laugh at themselves because of the affliction they once suffered as to whether or not their love was repaid. Although our affection is good, the desire that it be repaid is very natural. But once we receive the payment, we realize that the pay is all straw; it's all air and without substance so that the wind carries it away. No matter how much we have been loved, what is there that remains for us? As a result, you shouldn't care whether you are loved or not, unless the love is for your spiritual benefit as in the case of those perfect souls I mentioned, for they realize that our nature is such that if we are not loved we soon grow weary.
It will seem to you that such persons do not love or know anyone but God. I say, yes they do love, with a much greater and more genuine love, and with passion, and with a more beneficial love; in short, it is love. And these souls are more inclined to give than to receive. Even with respect to the Creator Himself they want to give more than to receive. I say that this attitude is what merits the name "love," for these other base attachments have usurped the name "love."
8. You will also wonder what they have affection for if they do not love because of the things they see. It is true that what they see they love and what they hear they become attached to; but the things that they see are stable. As soon as these persons love, they go beyond the bodies and turn their eyes to the soul and look to see if there is something to love in the soul. And if there isn't anything lovable, but they see some beginning and readiness so that if they love this soul and dig in this mine they will find gold, their labor causes them no pain. Nothing could be presented to them that they wouldn't eagerly do for the good of this soul, for they desire to continue loving it; but they know that if it does not love God very much and have His blessings, their loving it is impossible. And I say that this is impossible, no matter how much they are obligated to it; and even if it dies with love for them and does all the good works it can for them and possesses all natural graces combined, their wills will not have the strength to love it or make this love last. These persons with perfect love already have experience and know what everything is; they will not be deceived. They see that they are not at one with the other and that it is impossible for the two to continue loving each other. For it is a love that must end when they die if the other is not keeping the law of God, and these persons understand that the other does not love God and that the two must then go to their different destinies.
9. And one of these persons to whom the Lord has given true wisdom cannot esteem this love, which lasts only here on earth, for more than what it is worth, or even for less. Those who like to find their pleasure in the things of the world, in its delights, honors, and riches will attribute some value to whether the other is rich or has the means to provide for diversion and recreation. But whoever has already come to abhor all of this cares little or nothing about such things.
Well now in the case of perfect love, if a person loves there is the passion to make the other soul worthy of being loved, for, as I say, this person knows that otherwise he will not continue to love the other. It is a love that costs dearly. This person does everything he can for the other's benefit; he would lose a thousand lives that a little good might come to the other soul. O precious love that imitates the Commander-in-chief of love, Jesus, our Good!
