... the other is spiritual and mixed with it our own sensuality and weakness. The important thing is that these two kinds of love are unaffected by any passion, for where passion is present the good order is thrown into complete disorder. And if we love discreetly and moderately with the love I mentioned, all will be meritorious, for what seems to us to be sensuality will be converted into virtue. But the sensuality is so intermingled with the spiritual love that at times there is no one who understands this love, especially if it is for some confessor. For if persons who practice prayer see that he is holy and understands their mode of procedure, they will get to love him deeply. And here the devil batters one with scruples that disturb the soul very much, which is what the devil wants to do. If, especially, the confessor is leading the soul to higher perfection, the devil afflicts it so much that it abandons the confessor. And neither if it goes to another confessor nor again to another does the devil cease to torment it with that temptation.

What souls can do in this situation is to try not to think about whether they love the confessor or don't love him; but if they do love him, let them love him. For since we experience love for one who takes care of our bodies, shouldn't we also love one who always strives and works to care for our souls? Rather, I hold that a great principle for making much progress is to love the confessor, if he is holy and spiritual and if I see that he is diligent about my soul's progress. For our weakness is such that sometimes this love helps us very much to perform great deeds in the service of God. If the love is not of this kind, as I have said, there is danger; and the mere fact that he knows he is loved can do very serious harm, and in houses where there is a great deal of enclosure much more than in others. Because it is difficult to know which confessor is so good, there is need for much caution and prudence. The best advice is that the confessor not know that there is such affection and that no one tell him there is. But the devil so urges the soul to tell the confessor about this love that such advice becomes useless. It seems to the soul that all it has to confess is this affection and that it is obliged to confess it. For this reason I would like the Sisters to realize that this love doesn't amount to anything and pay no attention to it.

Let them take this counsel: if they know that the confessor directs all his words to the profit of their souls and they do not see or know of any other vanity (for this is soon understood by anyone who doesn't want to become a fool), and they know that he is God-fearing, they should not weary themselves over any temptation they may have about their great attachment; when the devil is worn out he will go away. But if they should become aware that the confessor is turning toward some vanity in what he says to them, they should be suspicious about it all and in no way carry on conversations with him even though these may concern prayer or God; but they should make their confession brief1y and bring it to a conclusion. And it would be best to tell the Mother Prioress that your soul doesn't get on well with him and change confessors. That would be the most proper thing to do, if there is the opportunity to do so, and I hope in God there will be. And you should do what you can to avoid speaking with him -- even suffer death.
