1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I have praised our Lord that Señor Juan de Ovalle despite this humid weather is better. May it please His Majesty that he continue to improve. My quartan fevers are continuing, and what is worse, the pain of the preceding winters is returning. Last night I slept but little. I believe they will bleed me again. God must have so ordained that it wouldn't appear that everything was the result of being at the Incarnation. The truth of the matter is that this sickness came upon me there, and I have never been without some aftereffects. Perhaps I would fare better there where you are living, and even here the pain up until now has not been as severe as in Avila -- in no way. And if it should come to that, I would be able to bear it better because I don't have as much work.
2. The business affairs with Pedro de la Banda are on good course. Nonetheless, I fear there will be some delay because it is necessary to take the matter to Madrid. Once the authorization is given, I will attend to the workmen, for they have not finished. It seems God wants me to remain here, for there is no one in the house who understands construction or business matters.
3. Yesterday we gave the habit to a young woman of high quality. And I believe she will have something she can contribute to us, and even a great deal. She's made to order -- the daughter of Martín de Avila Maldonado, and her mother is Doña Guiomar de Ledesma. This has been a source of happiness for us. She is delighted and we are with her.
4. This letter is also for Señor Juan de Ovalle; give him my regards, and give them also to my daughters. Doña Antonia sends you greetings -- she is well now, without the quartan fevers -- and the prioress also sends them. Greetings to the sisters there, especially the youngest one, for I don't think I'll be able to write, nor do I have anything in particular to say except to ask that they pray for me. May His Majesty make you a saint.
Your servant,
Teresa of Jesus
5. May the Lord repay you for what you do for me, for you are right about what you think is suitable. I have been very happy in learning about the improvement of Señor Juan de Ovalle and that you are in good health, and those angels as well.
