1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your lordship. Blessed be God that you are in good health. May it please His Majesty that you continue to improve, as I beg him.
2. It would be a consolation for me if I had the time to write you at length, but I have so little that I didn't want to begin. María Bautista will give you news of me, since I cannot do so here in this letter. When she writes, she gives me the news that I desire and informs me about you, glory to God, and with this I can get along without seeing any letter from you. I have written some letters. With one of them, I already know that, for a certain reason, they did not give it to you; with the others I don't know what happened. I have received only one from you since I have been here. (I mean I received it in Salamanca).
3. I have already told the duchess what you directed me to tell her. She gave me an account of the matter and said that she had never thought you knew about the recent events. She certainly deserves that one not lose her friendship. Nor can I write to Señora Doña María. I kiss her ladyship's hands many times, but it seems to me that our Lady defends her daughters better than her ladyship does her subjects, judging from what they tell me about her silence in these matters. May the Lord help that little angel, for what he is doing for her is now something truly new in the world. I think this is the reason he has ordained that she find herself alone and with these struggles: that his favor toward her be better known. This makes me praise His Majesty greatly.
4. Now, since you have many saints there, you are beginning to recognize those who are not, and so you are forgetting me. Nonetheless, I believe that in heaven you will see that you owe the sinner more than you do them. I would be more willing to send best wishes to Señora Doña María and my lady the countess if it were for something else than this wedding; although I am consoled that it is taking place so quickly.
5. May it please our Lord that it be for his service, and may your lordship and Señora Doña María rejoice in it for many years. I kiss the hands of Señora Doña Beatriz and my lady the duchess many times. May our Lord always guide you.
Your lordship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
6. I beg you to inform me whether Father Visitator has given the permission for me to spend some days at St. Joseph's; the prioress will write to me.
