For without our realizing it, while it seems to us that we are proceeding safely, we cause ourselves to fall into a pit we cannot escape from. Although it may not always be a matter of a known mortal sin which would bring us to hell, it will weaken our legs along this road I began to tell you about -- for I have not forgotten. Well you know how a person advances when he's bogged in a pit: his life ends there, and he will be doing enough if he doesn't keep from sinking lower, on into hell; he never improves. Since he doesn't improve, being there is of benefit neither to himself nor to others; rather, it does harm. For since the pit is dug out, many others who go along the way can also fall into it. If he gets out and covers it over with dirt, he does no harm to himself or to others. But I tell you that this temptation is very dangerous; I know much about it through experience, and so I am able to tell you about it; although not as well as I should like.

The devil makes you think you are poor and makes even others who practice prayer think this of themselves. And he is somewhat right because you have promised poverty -- orally, that is. I say orally, for it is impossible that, if with the heart we understand what we promise and then promise it, the devil could draw us for twenty years and even our whole lives into this temptation; 'impossible,' because we would see that we are deceiving the world and our own selves.

Well now, someone thinking he is poor or after having promised poverty will say: 'I don't want anything; I have this because I can't get along without it; the fact is I have to live in order to serve God. God wants us to care for these bodies.' The devil, like an angel, teaches a thousand different kinds of things here -- for all these things are good -- and so he makes the soul think it is already poor and has this virtue, that everything is accomplished. Now let us come to the test; for this deception of the devil is not recognized in any other way than by always checking carefully one's attitudes; and if care is taken a sign will be given very soon: the person has more income than he needs (I mean than he really needs, that if he can manage with one servant he not have three); someone brings a lawsuit against him for some of it, or a poor peasant fails to pay his rent, and the person becomes so disturbed and makes such a big issue of it that one would think he couldn't live without the money. He will say that he has to be a good administrator -- for there is always some excuse. I don't say that he should give everything up but that he should strive to know whether what he is doing is good or not. For the truly poor person holds these things in so little esteem that, though for some reason he obtains them, they are never the cause of disturbance; he never thinks he will be in want. And if he does lack something, he doesn't care much; he considers this an accessory and not the main thing. Since he has higher thoughts, only reluctantly does he become involved with money.

If he is a religious, whether man or woman (for it is already verified that such a person is religious, at least should be), he may not have anything because sometimes nobody gives him anything. But if somebody gives him something, it's a wonder if he thinks it to be more than enough. He always likes to hold on to something. If he can have a habit made out of fine cloth he doesn't ask for one from rough cloth. He keeps some little things he can pawn or sell, even though they may be books; for if a sickness comes he will need more comfort than usual.

Sinner that I am! Here now; is that what you promised? Forget yourselves and surrender to God come what may. If you go about providing for the future, it would be better for you to have a fixed revenue. Even though this may be done without sin, it's good that we understand these imperfections so as to see that we are far from having this virtue; and we may then ask for it from God and strive for it. In thinking that we have it, we become careless and mistaken, which is worse.

This also happens to us in regard to humility: it seems to us we don't want honor or that we couldn't care less about anything. The occasion arises in which a point of honor is at stake, and at once, in what you feel and do, you realize that you are not humble. For if something brings you more honor, you do not renounce it -- nor do those we mentioned even who are poor in spirit -- for the sake of growing more in humility. And please God they will not go seeking out honor! And so often do some repeat that they don't want anything or care about anything that as a matter of fact they think this is so. Even the habit of saying it makes them believe it more.
