Prologue
 
I have seen the mercies our Lord grants souls He has brought to these monasteries which observe the primitive rule of our Lady of Mount Carmel and which have been founded through His Majesty's good pleasure. For so many are the favors our Lord grants to some of the Sisters in particular that only souls who know about the need there is for an explanation of some of the things that pass between the soul and our Lord will be able to see the trial that is suffered in not having light. For a number of years now the Lord has given me great delight each time I hear or read some words from Solomon's Song of Songs. The delight is so great that without understanding the vernacular meaning of the Latin my soul is stirred and recollected more than by devotional books written in the language I understand. And this happens almost all the time, and even when the Latin words were translated for me into the vernacular I did not understand the text any more ...
2. For about two years, more or less, it seems to me the Lord had been giving me, for the sake of my purpose in writing this work, some understanding of the meaning of certain words, and I think these words will bring consolation to the Sisters our Lord leads by this path and also to me. For at times the Lord gives understanding of so much that I find myself hoping I won't forget, but I didn't dare put anything in writing.
3. Now in accord with the opinion of persons whom I'm obliged to obey, I shall write something about the understanding the Lord gives me of what is contained in the words that bring delight to my soul about this path of prayer. As I have said, it is along this path that the Lord leads these Sisters, and my daughters, in these monasteries. If this writing is such that you may see it, accept this poor little gift from one who desires for you as well as for herself all the gifts of the Holy Spirit, in whose name I begin. If I succeed in saying something worthwhile, the success will not be from me. May it please the divine Majesty...
