CHAPTER 11
 
Continues the subject that was begun about how Doña Casilda de Padilla attained her holy desires of entering religious life.
 
1. At this time the habit was received by a lay Sister in this monastery of the Immaculate Conception about whose vocation I should perhaps say something. Although she is from a different background (a little peasant girl), she is so virtuous, because of the great favors God has granted her, that she deserves to be remembered here in praise of Him. And when Doña Casilda (the name of this girl beloved of the Lord) went with her grandmother, who was her fiancé's mother, to this lay Sister's reception of the habit, she felt intensely drawn to this monastery, thinking that since it was small and the nuns were few they could serve the Lord better. But she still had not reached the decision to leave her fiancé, which, as I said, was what most held her back.
2. She recalled how before she was engaged she used to spend periods of time in prayer. Her mother in her goodness and holiness had brought her children up this way, for once they reached the age of seven she would make them enter an oratory from time to time, and she taught them how to reflect on the Passion of the Lord and made them to go to confession frequently. And thus she witnessed this happy outcome of her desires, that her children belong only to God. She told me herself that she had always offered them to God and begged Him to take them out of the world, for she was already disillusioned and knew how little it should be esteemed. I sometimes reflect on the accidental joy that will be hers when she sees them rejoicing in eternal joys and that she was the means, and on the gratitude they will have toward her, and how on the contrary those parents who did not bring their children up as children of God (for they are children more of God than of their parents) will find themselves, together with their children, in hell, and the maledictions they will spew forth and the despair they will experience.
3. Well, to return to what I was saying, since Doña Casilda realized that she was now reluctant even to recite the rosary, she had great fear that things would always get worse. It seemed to her she saw clearly that by coming to this house her salvation would be assured. And thus she reached an unwavering decision. One morning when she came here with her sister and mother, the occasion arose for their entering inside the monastery; indeed without any worry that the young girl would do what she did. Once she saw herself inside, no one was able to get her to leave the house. So many were the tears and words with which she begged them to allow her to stay that all were frightened. Her mother, although interiorly rejoicing, feared the relatives and did not want her to remain in this way lest they say that the daughter had been persuaded by her mother. And the prioress, too, felt like this, for it seemed to her that the girl was but a child and that more testing was needed. This took place in the morning. They had to stay until evening, and they sent for the girl's confessor and for Father Maestro Fray Domingo (the Dominican whom I mentioned in the beginning), who was my confessor, although I was not here then. This Father understood at once that it was the Spirit of the Lord. He helped her very much, suffering a good deal from her relatives, promising to help her so that she could return another day. (That is the way all those who seek to serve God must act. They must strive not to consider human prudence so much when they see a soul called by God).
4. After a great deal of persuasion, and so that blame would not be placed on her mother, she came out this time. Her desires continued to increase. Her mother began to inform her relatives secretly so that the fiancé would not learn of it. They said her desire was a childish whim and that she should wait until she was of age, for she wasn't yet twelve years old. She asked why, since they found her old enough to be married and left to the world, they didn't find her old enough to give herself to God. The things she said made it appear that it wasn't she who was speaking.
5. The matter couldn't be kept so secret that her fiancé was not informed. Since she knew about this, it seemed to her that she couldn't bear waiting for him to give his consent to her entering religious life. On the feast of the Immaculate Conception, when she was in the house of her grandmother (who was also her mother-in-law to be), who didn't know anything about her desires, she begged to be allowed to go to the country with her governess to relax a while. Her grandmother, to please her, allowed her to go, in a carriage along with her servants. Giving one of the servants some money, the girl asked him to wait for her at the entrance of this monastery with some bundles of twigs or vine branches. She arranged to go in a roundabout way so that they would pass by this house. When she arrived at the entrance, she told the servants to ask at the turn for a jug of water and not to tell who it was for, and she quickly got down from the carriage. The servants told her not to get down, that they would bring the water to her, but she refused. The bundles were already there. She told them to tell the nuns to come to the door to get those bundles, and she stood waiting there. When the nuns opened, she entered inside and went and embraced the statue of our Lady, weeping and begging the prioress not to throw her out. The shouts of the servants were loud as was also their pounding on the door. She went to speak to them at the grille and told them that she would by no means come out and that they should go and tell her mother. The women that had gone with her broke into loud laments. She made little of it all. Her grandmother, when told the news, decided to go at once.
6. In sum, neither the girl's grandmother, nor her uncle, nor her fiancé (who came to the grille and tried to get her to change her mind) could do any more than torment her when with her, and afterward she would be stronger in her resolve. Her fiancé, after much moaning, told her that she could serve God more by giving alms. She answered that he could give them. And, in response to his other arguments, she told him that she was more obliged to seek her salvation and that she saw she was weak and that she could not be saved amid worldly occasions of sin, and that he should not complain about her because she hadn't left him except for God, and that because of this she was not offending him. Once she saw that nothing satisfied him, she got up and left him.
7. He made no impression on her; rather, she felt totally displeased with him. When God enlightens the soul with truth, temptations and stumbling blocks set by the devil help it more. For it is His Majesty who fights for the soul, and thus she saw clearly here that it was not she who was speaking.
8. Since her fiancé and relatives saw how little they accomplished in trying to get her to leave willingly, they turned to force. Thus, they obtained a court order to take her out of the monastery and that the nuns allow her to leave. During the whole time, from the feast of the Immaculate Conception to that of the Holy Innocents (when they took her away), she remained in the monastery, without receiving the habit, but following all the religious observances as though she had received it, and with the greatest happiness. On the day the law officers took her away she was brought to the house of a gentleman. She was in tears, asking why they were tormenting her since it would be no avail. In the gentleman's house men religious as well as other persons tried hard to persuade her. Some thought it was all childish, others wanted her to enjoy the married state. I'd have to go on at great length if I were to tell about the arguments she was confronted with and the way she got out of them all. She left them astonished by the things she said.
9. Since they saw they were getting no where, they brought her to her mother's house so as to detain her there for a while. Her mother was now tired of seeing so much disturbance, but did not by any means help her; rather, from what appeared, she was against her. It could be that she was against her so as to test her further. At least that's what she told me afterward, and she is so holy one cannot but believe what she says. But the girl did not know this. Moreover, the girl's confessor was extremely opposed. As a result, she had only God, and one of her mother's maids, who was one in whom she confided. Thus she underwent much trial and hardship until her twelfth year, when she learned that, since they couldn't get her to give up the idea, they were planning to bring her to be a nun at the monastery where her sister was, for not so much austerity was practiced there.
10. Knowing about this, she was determined to strive through every means she could to obtain her happiness by going ahead with her own plan. And thus, one day when she went to Mass with her mother, her mother went to confess in one of the confessionals. Doña Casilda then asked her governess to go to one of the Fathers and ask him to say a Mass. When she saw that the governess was gone, she placed her chopines in her sleeves, lifted her skirt and hastened as quickly as she could to this monastery, which was quite far away. Her governess, when she didn't find her, went after her; once she got near, she asked a man to catch hold of her. He said afterward that he wasn't able to move, and so he let her get away. The girl entered the first gate of the monastery, closed it, and began to shout; when the governess arrived, this young girl was already inside the monastery. They gave her the habit immediately. And thus she fulfilled the good inspirations the Lord had placed within her. His Majesty began very shortly to repay her with spiritual favors, and she to serve Him with the greatest happiness, humility, and detachment from everything.
11. May He be blessed forever! For thus, through the rough, woolen dress of the poor He gives pleasure to one who was so attached to very costly and elegant clothes; although the dress of the poor played no part in hiding her beauty. For the Lord distributed natural graces to her as well as spiritual: a temperament and intelligence so agreeable as to awaken all to praise His Majesty. May it please Him that there be many who will thus answer His call.

CHAPTER 12
 
Tells about the life and death of a religious, Beatriz de la Encarnación, whom our Lord brought to this same house. Her life was one of high perfection, and her death was of a kind that makes it fitting for us to remember her.
 
1. Some years before, a young girl, Doña Beatriz, a distant relative of Doña Casilda, entered this monastery to become a nun. She amazed all when they saw the great virtues the Lord was forming in her. And both the nuns and the prioress affirmed that they had never noticed in any aspect of her life anything they would consider an imperfection. Nor did they ever see any other expression on her face than a modest happiness that well revealed the inner joy of her soul. With an untroubled quiet she kept strict silence in such a way that nothing singular was noticed about it. Never was she known to have spoken a reprehensible word, nor was any obstinacy seen in her, nor did she ever make an excuse, even though, as is the custom in these houses in order to practice mortification, the prioress to test her tried to blame her for something she had not done. Never did she complain about anything, or of any Sister. Nor by her expression or word did she in the office she held give displeasure to anyone or occasion to attribute some imperfection to her. Neither was any reason found for accusing her of some fault in chapter, even though the defects the monitors would point out during chapter were very minute. In all events her interior and exterior composure was unusual. This arose from her keeping eternity very much in mind and the end for which God created us. She always bore the praises of God on her lips and the greatest spirit of gratitude; in sum, hers was a perpetual prayer.
2. In matters of obedience she was never at fault, but showed a readiness, perfection, and joyfulness in all that she was ordered to do. She practiced the greatest charity toward her neighbor -- this was shown in such a way that she said that she would allow herself to be broken into a thousand pieces to keep any soul from being lost and so that thus all souls might find joy in their Brother, Jesus Christ (which is how she referred to our Lord). As for her trials, which were very severe, there were terrible illnesses, as I shall say afterward, with intense pain, and she suffered them with the greatest willingness and happiness, as if they were choice favors and delights. Our Lord must have given her spiritual favors and delights, for otherwise it would have been impossible for her to bear her illnesses as cheerfully as she did.
3. It happened that in this city of Valladolid some men were going to be burned because of their great crimes. She must have known that these men were not approaching their death with as good a disposition as was fitting, and this caused her the greatest affliction; with much anguish she went to our Lord and begged Him very earnestly for the salvation of those souls. And in exchange for what they deserved (or that she might obtain that grace -- I don't remember the precise words), she promised to give her whole life, all the trials and sufferings she could bear. That same night the first fever struck her, and until she died she was always suffering. The condemned men, in turn, died well; hence it seems that God heard her prayer.
4. She was next afflicted with an intestinal abscess causing the severest suffering. The patience the Lord had placed in her soul was indeed necessary in order for her endure it. This abscess was so internally located that the medicines they gave were of no help until the Lord willed that it come to a head and drain, and thus she improved somewhat from this illness. With that desire for suffering given to her, she was unable to be satisfied with little, and thus once, while she was listening to a sermon on the feast of the Cross, her desire so increased that when the sermon was over she went in a tearful impulse and threw herself on her bed. When they asked her what was the matter, she answered that they should beseech God to give her many trials and that with this she would be content.
5. She spoke with the prioress about all these interior matters and in this practice found comfort. Throughout her illness, she never gave the least trouble to anyone, nor did she do anything but what the infirmarian wanted, even if it was something as slight as drinking a little water. It is very common for souls who practice prayer to desire trials when they do not have any. But when they do and are in the midst of these very trials, it is not common for them to rejoice. And thus, once when she was afflicted, though the affliction did not last long, and suffering extreme pain from an abscess in her throat so that she could not swallow, she told the prioress in the presence of the Sisters (since the prioress's duty was to console and encourage her to bear so much sickness) that she had no pain and that she would not change places with any of the Sisters who were very well. She kept the Lord, for whom she was suffering, so present before her that she tried to cover up her suffering as much as possible that others would not know how great it was. And this, except when the pain grew intense, she complained very little.
6. It seemed to her there was no one on earth as wretched as she; thus, insofar as one could understand, her humility was great. In speaking of the virtues of other persons, she was very joyful. In matters concerning mortification she was persistent. Without letting it be noticed, she avoided what afforded her recreation, for unless one were watching closely, this would not be known. It didn't seem she lived or conversed with creatures, so little did she care about anything. However things went, she bore them with peace. She was always composed; so much so that once a Sister said to her that she seemed to be like one of those persons of nobility so proud that they would rather die from their hunger than let anyone outside know about it. For they couldn't believe that she failed to feel some things, although it hardly seemed so.
7. She performed all her work and duties with the goal of not losing any merit, and so she used to say to the Sisters: "The smallest thing when done for the love of God is priceless; we should set our eyes, Sisters, only on this goal of love and on pleasing Him." She never meddled in things that were not her responsibility; thus she found fault with no one but herself. So strongly did she feel that no good should be said of her that she was careful not to speak well of others in their presence so as not to cause them pain. She never sought consolation (neither by going to the garden nor in any created thing), for she said it would be rude to seek relief from the sufferings that our Lord gave her. Thus she never asked for anything, but got along with what was given her. She also said that it would be a cross for her to find consolation in anything that was not God. The fact is that when I inquired from those in the house, no one had seen in her anything other than what would be seen in someone of great perfection.
8. Well, when the time arrived in which our Lord desired to take her from this life, the sufferings increased; so many illnesses came upon her together that others, in order to praise our Lord at observing the happiness with which she bore them, went at times to see her. The chaplain especially, who is the confessor in that monastery and a true servant of God, had a great desire to be present at her death. Being her confessor, he considered her a saint. God was pleased to grant him this desire. For since she was in so much pain, and although she had already been anointed they called him in case there would be need that night for her to be reconciled or helped to die. A little before nine while all were with her (and he too), about a quarter of an hour before she died, she raised her eyes, and a happiness like a shining light came over her countenance. She remained as would someone gazing on an object that gives profound joy, for she smiled twice. All those who were there, and the priest himself, received so much spiritual delight and happiness that they didn't know what else to say than that it seemed to them they were in heaven. And with this happiness that I mention, her eyes fixed on heaven, she died, looking like an angel. Thus we are able to believe, according to our faith and according to her life, that the Lord brought her to rest in payment for the many things she had desired to suffer for Him.
9. The chaplain affirms, and has told many persons, that at the time of her burial he perceived an extremely sweet fragrance coming from her body. The Sister sacristan also affirms that despite all the candles that burned at the funeral and burial, not one of them grew smaller in size. All this can be believed as coming from the mercy of God. In speaking of these things with a confessor of hers from the Society of Jesus with whom for many years she discussed her soul, I was told that they didn't amount to much; and he said he was not surprised because he knew that our Lord communicated a great deal with her.
10. May it please His Majesty, my daughters, that we know how to profit from companionship as good as this and from many other persons whom our Lord gives us in these houses. It may be that I will say something about them so that those who are a bit lukewarm will be strengthened and that we may all praise the Lord who in this way lets His magnificent riches show forth in us weak, little women.

CHAPTER 13
 
Treats of how and by whom in the year 1568 the first house for the observance of the primitive rule by discalced Carmelite friars was founded.
 
1. Before making the foundation of Valladolid, I had already agreed with both Father Fray Antonio de Jesús, who was then prior of the Carmelite monastery of St. Anne in Medina, and Fray John of the Cross, as I have already mentioned, that they would be the first to enter if a monastery for discalced friars were founded for the observance of the primitive rule. Since I had no resources for acquiring a house, I did nothing but commend the matter to our Lord. For, as I have said, I was now satisfied with these Fathers. The Lord had indeed exercised Father Fray Antonio de Jesús in trials during the year since I had spoken with him; and he suffered them with much perfection. As for Father Fray John of the Cross, no trial was necessary. Even though he had lived among the calced friars, those of the cloth, he always lived a life of great perfection and religious observance. Since the Lord had given me the chief requirement for a beginning, which was friars, He was pleased to arrange the rest.
2. A gentleman from Avila, named Don Rafael, with whom I had never spoken, found out, I don't know how (for I don't remember), about my desire to make a foundation for discalced friars. He came and offered me a house he owned in a little town of very few inhabitants (I don't think even twenty, but I don't remember now). He kept the house there for an administrator who collected the revenue from his grain fields. Although I imagined how it might look, I praised our Lord and thanked this gentleman very much. He told me it was on the direct route to Medina del Campo and that since I had to pass by there to make the foundation in Valladolid I could see it. I told him I would, and indeed that is what I did. I left Avila with a nun companion and with Father Julián de Avila, the chaplain at St. Joseph's in Avila, the priest I mentioned who helped me in these travels.
3. Although we left in the morning, we got lost because we didn't know the road; and since the place is little known, we couldn't get much information about where it was. Thus, our traveling that day was very trying and the sun was very hot. When we thought we were near, we discovered we had just as far to go. I always remember the tiredness we felt and the wrong roads we took on that journey. The result was that we arrived shortly before nightfall.
When we entered the house it was in such a state that we dared not remain there that night; it wasn't at all clean and was filled with vermin. It had a fairly good entrance way, a room double in size, a loft, and a small kitchen. This was all we had for our monastery. I figured that the entrance way could serve as the chapel, the loft as the choir, which would adapt well, and the room for sleeping.
My companion, although much better than I and very fond of penance, couldn't bear the thought of my planning to found a monastery there and said to me: "Surely, Mother, there isn't a soul, however good, that could put up with this. Don't even consider it." The Father who came with me, although he agreed with my companion, did not oppose me since I had told him my intentions. We went to spend the night in the church, although not in vigil because we were exhausted.
4. When we arrived in Medina, I spoke immediately with Father Fray Antonio, and I told him what took place and that if he would have the courage to stay there for a while, I was certain God would soon provide a remedy, and that the important thing was to begin. It seems to me I was most aware of what the Lord had done and was feeling sure, so to speak; just as I do now from what I see and even much more so because of what up till now I have seen, for at the time of my writing this there are, through the goodness of God, ten monasteries of discalced friars. And I told him he should realize that neither the provincial at that time nor the previous one would give permission -- for the foundation needed their consent, as I said at the beginning -- if we were seen living in a well established house. This was apart from the fact that we did not have the means for such a house. And I pointed out that in that little place and house the foundation would not attract attention. And so Fray Antonio told me that he would be willing to live not only there but in a pigsty. Fray John of the Cross was of the same mind.
5. Now what remained was to obtain the consent of the two Fathers I mentioned because this was the condition under which our Father General granted the permission. I hoped in our Lord to obtain it, and so I told Father Fray Antonio to take care to do all he could to gather something together for this house. I went with Fray John of the Cross to the foundation of Valladolid about which I have written. And since we spent some days before establishing the enclosure on account of the workmen who were getting the house ready, there was an opportunity to teach Father Fray John of the Cross about our way of life so that he would have a clear understanding of everything, whether it concerned mortification or the style of both our community life and the recreation we have together. The recreation is taken with such moderation that it only serves to reveal the Sisters' faults and to provide a little relief so that the rule may be kept in its strictness. He was so good that I, at least, could have learned much more from him than he from me. Yet this is not what I did, but I taught him about the lifestyle of the Sisters.
6. It pleased God that the provincial, Fray Alonso González, from whom I had to obtain approbation, was there. He was elderly, good natured, and without malice. I told him many things, and reminded him of the account he would have to give if he hindered a work as good as this when asked by God to carry it out. His Majesty, wanting the foundation, put him in the right disposition, for he mellowed very much. When Doña María de Mendoza and the Bishop of Avila, her brother (who is the one who always favored and protected us) came, they convinced both him and Father Fray Angel de Salazar, the previous provincial, the one from whom I feared all the difficulty. Moreover, a certain need arose at the time for which the latter provincial had need of assistance from Doña María de Mendoza. This fact, I believe, helped a great deal, although even if this opportunity had not been present, our Lord would have moved the provincial's heart just as He did the heart of Father General which was anything but inclined to the idea.
7. Oh, God help me, how many obstacles I have seen in these business matters that seemed impossible to overcome, and how easy it was for His Majesty to remove them. And how ashamed I am not to be better after seeing what I have seen. For now as I am writing, I am growing fearful and want our Lord to make known to everyone how in these foundations we creatures have done next to nothing. The Lord has directed all by means of such lowly beginnings that only His Majesty could have raised the work to what it now is. May He be always blessed, amen.

CHAPTER 14
 
Continues to speak of the foundation of the first monastery of discalced Carmelite friars. For the honor and glory of God, tells something about both the kind of life lived there and the good our Lord began to do in those surroundings.
 
1. Having the permission of these two provincials, I now figured that nothing was lacking. We arranged that Father Fray John of the Cross would go to the house and get it ready so that, in spite of all, it could be lived in. For me, what was most urgent was that the friars begin, for I was very fearful lest some obstacle would come along our path. And this they did. Father Fray Antonio had already gathered some of the things necessary. Insofar as we could, we helped him; although our help amounted to little. He came to Valladolid with great happiness to speak to me and told me what he had collected, which was very little. It was only with clocks that he was well provided, for he had five of them; this greatly amused me. He told me they were meant as a help to follow the daily schedule, which he wanted well fixed; I don't think he even had any bed yet to sleep in.
2. Although they had wanted to do a great deal with the house, not much time was required to prepare it because there was no money. When it was ready, Father Fray Antonio happily renounced his priorship and promised to observe the primitive rule. Although he was told to try the new way of life first, he did not want to. He went to his little house with the greatest happiness in the world. Fray John was already there.
3. Father Fray Antonio has told me that when he first came near the little place he felt a great inner joy, and it seemed to him that he was now through with the world by leaving it all and placing himself in that solitude. Neither of the two found the house unfit; rather, it seemed to them they were living in the midst of great pleasures.
4. Oh, God help me! What little these buildings and exterior comforts do interiorly. Out of love for Him, I ask you my Sisters and Fathers, that you never fail to be very moderate in this matter of large and magnificent houses. Let us keep before us our true founders, those holy fathers from whom we descend, for we know that by means of that path of poverty and humility they now enjoy God.
5. Truly I have seen that there is more spirituality and even inner happiness when suitable accommodations for the body are seemingly lacking than afterward when the house is large and the accommodations good. What benefit is it to us that the house be large since it is only one small room that each one habitually uses? That it be well designed -- what help is that to us? Indeed, if it isn't well designed, we won't then have to go around looking at the walls. By considering that the house will not be ours forever, but ours only for as short a time as this life lasts, even though that may be long, everything will be easy for us. We will see that the less we have here below, the more we will enjoy in eternity, where the dwelling places will be in conformity with the love with which we have imitated the life of our good Jesus. If we say that these are the beginning steps in order to renew the rule of the Virgin, His Mother, our Lady and Patroness, let us not be offensive to her or to our holy fathers of the past as to fail to live as they did. Since, because of our weakness, we cannot do so in every way, in matters that are not essential for sustaining life, we must proceed very carefully. For it is all a matter of but a little effort, and that becomes delightful, as was the case with these two Fathers. And once we are determined to undergo this effort, the difficulty passes, for all the pain is but a little in the beginning.
6. On the First or Second Sunday of Advent (I don't remember which of these Sundays it was), in the year 1568, the first Mass was said in that little stable of Bethlehem, for it doesn't seem to me the house was any better. The following Lent, while on my way to the foundation in Toledo, I passed by there. When I arrived in the morning, Father Fray Antonio was sweeping the doorway to the church with that joyful expression on his face that he always has. I said to him: "What's this, my Father; what has become of your honor?" Telling me of his great happiness, he answered with these words: "I curse the day I had any."
When I entered the little church, I was astonished to see the spirit the Lord had put there. And it wasn't only I, for the two merchants, my friends from Medina who had accompanied me there, did nothing else but weep. There were so many crosses, so many skulls! I never forget a little cross made for the holy water fount from sticks with a paper image of Christ attached to it; it inspired more devotion than if it had been something very expertly carved.
7. The choir was in the loft. In the middle of the loft the ceiling was high enough to allow for the recitation of the Hours, but one had to stoop low in order to enter and to hear Mass. There were in the two corners facing the church two little hermitages, where one could do no more than either lie down or sit. Both were filled with hay because the place was very cold, and the roof almost touched one's head. Each had a little window facing the altar and a stone for a pillow; and there, too, the crosses and skulls. I learned that after the friars finished Matins they did not leave the choir before Prime but remained there in prayer, for their prayer was so deep that when it came time to say Prime their habits were covered with snow without their having become aware of the fact. The two Fathers recited the Hours with another Father from among those of the cloth who went to stay with them (although he didn't change his habit because he was very sickly) and another young, unordained brother who was also there.
8. They used to go preach in many of the neighboring towns where the people were left without any instructions in Christian doctrine. On this account also I rejoiced that the house had been founded there. For I had been told that there was no monastery nearby nor any place from which the people could get instructions, which was a great pity. In a short time the reputation the Fathers had was so great that I experienced the deepest consolation when I learned of it. For their preaching, as I say, they journeyed barefoot a league and a half, or two, for at the time they did not yet wear sandals (afterward they were ordered to wear them), and in much snow and cold. When finished with their preaching and confessing, they returned very late to their house for supper. In their happiness, all they did seemed small to them.
9. As for food, they had a surplus, for the people in the neighboring towns provided them with more than they needed. And some gentlemen from those towns came there to confession and offered them better houses and sites. Among those gentlemen was a Don Luis, lord of five towns. This particular gentleman had built a church to honor an image of our Lady, which was indeed worthy of being venerated. His father had sent it through a merchant from Flanders to his grandmother or mother (I don't remember which). The merchant liked it so much that he kept it for many years, and afterward at the hour of his death ordered that it be sent to Don Luis. It is a large altarpiece; I haven't seen anything better in my life -- and others say the same. Father Fray Antonio went to that place at the request of this gentleman and saw the image; he liked it so much, and rightly so, that he agreed to transfer the monastery there. This town is called Mancera. Although there was no well in that place, nor did it seem that any could be found there, this gentleman built the friars a monastery, small and in keeping with their profession, and gave them furnishings. He did everything very well.
10. I don't want to fail to mention the way, considered to be miraculous, in which the Lord gave them water. One day after supper, while the prior, Father Fray Antonio, was talking in the cloister with his friars about the need for water, he rose and took a staff he was holding in his hands and made a sign of the cross on one part of it (I think he made the sign of the cross, although I don't remember well whether he did or not); but anyway he pointed with the stick and said: "Now, dig here." After they had dug only a little, so much water came out that it is now even difficult to drain the well so as to clean it. The water is very good for drinking, and all that was needed for the remaining construction work was taken from there, and never, as I say, does the well empty out. After they had enclosed a garden with a wall, they sought to get water for the garden and made a water wheel and went to much expense; up till now, they have not been able to find any more, not even a little.
11. I couldn't thank our Lord enough when I saw that little house, which shortly before was uninhabitable, with such a spirit that everywhere I looked I found something edifying. And by the way they were living, I learned of the mortification, prayer, and good example they were giving. A gentleman and his wife, whom I knew and who lived in a nearby town, came to see me there, and they never stopped telling me about the sanctify of these Fathers and the great good they were doing in those towns. I experienced the greatest interior joy, for it seemed to me that I saw a beginning that would be of much benefit to our order and service to our Lord. May it please His Majesty that things will continue as they are now, and that my plan will indeed by realized.
The merchants who had accompanied me told me that not for all the world would they have missed having gone there. What a thing virtue is, for that poverty pleased those merchants more than all their riches, and their souls were left satisfied and comforted.
12. After conversing with those Fathers, I spoke of some things and begged them especially -- since I am weak and wretched -- not to be so rigorous in penitential practices, for what they were doing was severe. Since it had cost me so much in desire and prayer for the Lord to give me some friars to begin with and I saw such a good start, I feared lest the devil would attempt to put an end to this beginning before what I hoped for could be accomplished. As one who is imperfect and of little faith, I did not observe that this was God's work and that His Majesty would carry it forward. Since they engaged in practices in which I did not, they paid little attention to my words about giving them up. And thus I went away greatly consoled, although I did not give God the praise so great a favor deserved.
May it please His Majesty, in His goodness, that I be able to serve somehow for the very many things I owe Him, amen. For, indeed, I understood that this foundation was a much greater grace than the favor He granted me to found houses of nuns.

CHAPTER 15
 
Treats of the foundation of the monastery of the glorious St. Joseph made in the city of Toledo in 1569.
 
1. In the city of Toledo there was a merchant, a respected man and servant of God, who never wanted to marry but lived a very good Catholic life of great trustworthiness and virtue. Through honest trade he went about increasing his wealth with the intention of using it for some work very pleasing to the Lord. He was struck with a fatal illness. His name was Martín Ramírez. A Father from the Society of Jesus named Pablo Hernández, a confessor of mine when I was in Toledo arranging for the foundation of Malagón, was very eager that one of our monasteries be founded in Toledo. So he went to speak with the man and told him of the great service such a foundation would give our Lord and how the fund for chaplains and chaplaincies that he wanted to establish could be left for this monastery and that the certain feast days and everything else he had resolved to leave to the care of a parish in that city would be taken care of by such a monastery.
2. The merchant was so sick that he saw there was no time to make such arrangements, and he left the whole matter in the hands of his brother, whose name was Alonso Alvarez Ramírez; once this was done, God took him. The right decision had been made, for this Alonso Alvarez is a very discreet God-fearing man, trustful and charitable in almsgiving, and open-minded. As one who has had many dealings with him, I can as an eyewitness say this in all truthfulness.
3. When Martín Ramírez died, I was still involved with the foundation at Valladolid. There I received a letter from Father Pablo Hernández of the Society and from Alonso Alvarez himself, giving me an account of what had happened and advising me that if I wanted to accept this foundation I should come quickly. So, shortly after the house in Valladolid was put in order, I left for Toledo. I arrived on the eve of Our Lady of the Incarnation and went to the house of Doña Luisa, which is where I stayed at other times. She was the foundress of Malagón. I was received with great joy, for she loves me very much. I brought with me two nuns from St. Joseph's in Avila, who were great servants of God. We were immediately given a suite of rooms, as was that lady's custom, where we remained with as much recollection as in a monastery.
4. I immediately began to take up the business matters with Alonso Alvarez and a son-in-law of his, named Diego Ortiz. The latter, although very good, and a theologian, was more unyielding in his opinion than Alonso Alvarez. He did not readily soften his demands. They began to ask for many conditions that I didn't think I could easily agree to. While engaged in these negotiations, I was looking for a house to rent so as to establish possession of the new foundation. But I was never able to find one that was suitable, although a great deal of searching had been done. Nor was I able to get the ecclesiastical administrator to give me the license (for at that time the archbishop was not there), although this lady in whose house I was staying tried hard, as did also a nobleman, a canon in this church, whose name was Don Pedro Manrique, son of the governor of Castile. Don Pedro was a very good servant of God, and still is (for he is alive, though he had poor health). Some years after this house was founded, he entered the Society of Jesus where he is now. He was an important person in this city because he is very intelligent and trustworthy. Nonetheless, he was unable to get me the license. For when the governor softened in his resistance, those on the council did not. To add to this, Alonso Alvarez and I couldn't come to an agreement because of his son-in-law to whom he gave much power. We ended up by disagreeing on everything.
5. I didn't know what to do, for I hadn't come for any other reason, and I saw that if I went away without making a foundation, the fact would be much publicized. Nonetheless, I was saddened more over their not giving me the license than by all the rest. I knew that once possession of the foundation was established, the Lord would provide as He had in other places. So I resolved to talk to the governor, and I went to a church that was next to his house and sent someone to beg him to be kind enough to speak with me. More than two months had passed in trying to obtain the license, and each day the matter got worse. When I saw him, I told him that it was hard to accept the fact that there were women who wanted to live with so much austerity, perfection, and withdrawal from the world while those who would bear nothing of this but lived in comfort wanted to hinder these works that were of such service to our Lord. These and many other things I told him with a great determination which was given me by the Lord. The governor's heart was so moved that before I left he gave me the license.
6. I went away very happy. It seemed to me I now had everything without having anything, for I must have had only about three or four ducats. With these I bought two paintings done on canvas (for I didn't have anything with an image to put on the altar), two straw mattresses and a woolen blanket. As for the house, we forgot about it since I was not in agreement with Alonso Alvarez. A merchant in the same city, a friend of mine named Alonso de Avila, who had never wanted to marry and who thinks only of doing good for those in prison -- and he does many other good works as well -- told me not to be afflicted, that he would find a house for me; but he took sick. Some days before, a very holy Franciscan friar named Martín de la Cruz had come to that place. He was there for some days, and when he left he sent me a young man named Andrada (by no means rich but very poor), asking him to do everything I told him. One day when Andrada was attending Mass in a church, he came to speak to me and tell me what he had been told by that blessed man and that he was certainly ready to do everything he could for me; although only with his personal service could he help us. I thanked him and was amused, and my companions even more so, to see the kind of help that saintly man had sent us. The clothes this young man had on were not the kind one would wear when going to speak with discalced nuns.
7. Having the license but no one who would help me, I didn't know what to do or whom to entrust with the task of seeking a house for me to rent. I remembered the young man that Fray Martín de la Cruz had sent me and mentioned him to my companions. They laughed very much at me and told me not to do such a thing, that it would serve for no more than to make the secret plan public. I didn't want to listen to them. Since he was sent by the servant of God, I trusted that there was something for him to do and that this offer to help had a mystery about it. Thus I sent for him and told him, placing him under all the secrecy I could, what was happening and asked that with this in mind he look for a house for me and that I would provide a guarantor for the rent. The guarantor of the rent was the good Alonso de Avila who, as I mentioned, took sick. The task seemed a very easy one to Andrada and he told me that he would look for one. Right away, the day after the next, while I was attending Mass at the house of the Society of Jesus, he came to speak to me and said that he already had the house, that he had the keys, that it was nearby and that we should go to see it. And this we did. It was so nice that we stayed in it for almost a year.
8. Frequently, when I reflect on this foundation, I am amazed by the designs of God. For almost three months -- at least more than two, but I don't remember exactly -- very wealthy persons had made the rounds of Toledo looking for a house for us and were never able to find one, as though there were no houses in the city. And then this youth comes along, not rich but very poor, and the Lord desired that he find one immediately. And though it could have been found without trouble if an agreement had been reached with Alonso Alvarez, not only did we fail to reach one but were far from doing so. Thus in God's design the foundation had to be made in poverty and with trial.
9. Well then, since the house pleased us, I gave the order at once to take possession before anything was done in it, lest some obstacle arise. Indeed, in a short while Andrada, who was mentioned, came to tell me that the house was being vacated that day, that we should bring our furniture. I told him there was little to do, for we had nothing but two straw mattresses and a blanket. He must have been surprised. My companions regretted that I told him and said that since I had mentioned this to him and he thereby saw how poor we were, he would not want to help us. I had not thought of this, but he paid little attention to it. For the One who gave him that desire had to advance the work until it was completed. And indeed I don't think we ourselves could have done better than Andrada in preparing the house and getting workmen. We borrowed the things necessary for saying Mass, and, in order to take possession of the house, went with a workman at nightfall; and we brought a bell that is used at the elevation of the Blessed Sacrament, for we had no other. With much fear on my part, we spent the whole night getting everything in order. There was no place for a church except in one of the rooms of another little house next to this one and occupied at the time by some women; the owner had also rented this little house to us.
10. Since we had everything ready by dawn and we had not dared say anything to the women lest they reveal what we were doing, we began to make a door through a thin partition wall which led on to a very tiny patio. When the women, still in bed, heard the pounding, they got up terrified. We had all we could do to calm them down; but it was already time for Mass, and although they were hard to deal with, they did not do us any harm. And when they saw what our intention was the Lord pacified them.
11. Afterward, I realized how poorly we had proceeded; for at the time, with the absorption God gives in the work so that it will get done, one does not think of the difficulties. Well, when the owner of the house found out that it was made into a church, the trouble began, for she was the wife of an heir to an entailed estate and was very much opposed to this. The Lord was pleased that when she learned we would buy the house if we were satisfied with it, she was appeased. But, when those on the council learned that the monastery, for which they had never wanted to give a license, was founded, they became very angry and went and complained to the canon (whom I had secretly informed), boasting to him that they would do everything in their power to destroy it. Since the ecclesiastical administrator had gone on a trip after having given me the permission and was not in the city, they went to complain to the canon I mentioned, astonished at such boldness that a useless little woman should found a monastery against their will. He pretended that he knew nothing and pacified them as best he could, telling them that she had done so in other cities and with due authorization.
12. After I don't know how many days, they sent us a notice of excommunication so that no Mass could be said until I presented the documents giving me authorization for what was done. I answered very meekly that I would do what they ordered, although I was not obliged to obey in that matter. And I asked Don Pedro Manrique, the gentleman I mentioned, to go and speak to them and show them the documents. He appeased them since the deed was already done; otherwise, we would have been in deep trouble.
13. For some days we had no more than the straw mattresses and the blanket, and even that day we didn't have so much as a stick of wood to make a fire to cook a sardine. And I don't know who it was the Lord moved to leave a little bundle of wood in the church to help us. The nights were quite cold; but with the blanket and the woolen mantles we wore, we kept ourselves warm, for these mantles often help us. It will seem impossible that though we had stayed in the house of that lady who loved me so much, we had to enter the new foundation in so much poverty. I don't know the reason, except that God wanted us to experience the good that lies in this virtue. I did not ask for help, because I don't like to be a bother; and she perhaps wasn't aware. Moreover, I am indebted for what she was able to give us.
14. The experience was very good for us; the interior consolation and happiness we felt were so great that I often think about what the Lord keeps stored up within the virtues. It seems to me this lack we experienced was the cause of a sweet contemplation. But this poverty did not last long, for soon Alonso Alvarez himself as well as others were providing us with more than we needed. And, true to say, my sadness was such that it resembled that of discovering that many gold jewels in my possession were taken away and I left poor. Thus I felt sorry that they were bringing our poverty to an end, and my companions felt the same. Since I saw they were sad, I asked them what troubled them, and they answered: "What else could it be, Mother, for it no longer seems we are poor."
15. From then on my desire to be very poor increased. And I felt freedom in having so little esteem for temporal goods, for the lack of these goods brings an increase of interior good. Certainly, such a lack carries in its wake another kind of fullness and tranquility.
During those days in which I was discussing the foundation with Alonso Alvarez, there were many persons to whom the plan seemed wrong -- and they told me so -- since that family was not from the nobility, although the family was very good, regardless of its social status, as I have said. They thought that in a city as important as Toledo I would not lack comfort. I did not pay much attention to this, because, glory to God, I have always esteemed virtue more than lineage. But so much was said to the ecclesiastical administrator that he gave me the license under the condition that I make the foundation as in other places.
16. I didn't know what to do, for after the foundation was made they again took up the negotiations. But since the house was already founded, I arranged to let them become the patrons of the large chapel and settled things in such a way that they would have no connection with what pertained to the monastery, as is now the case. There was already someone who wanted the large chapel, an important person; and there were many opinions about this so that I didn't know what to decide. Our Lord desired to give me light in this matter, and so at one time He told me that lineage and social status mattered not at all in the judgment of God. He gave me a severe reprimand for listening to those who spoke to me about this; concerns of this sort were not for those of us who had already despised the world.
17. With these and other reasons I was very humbled, and I resolved to settle what had been begun and give them the chapel. I never regretted it, for we have seen clearly what poor assistance we would have received as far as buying a house goes. But with the help of Alonso Alvarez we bought a house in the place where we are now. It is one of the nicest in Toledo, and cost twelve thousand ducats. Since, according to the contract, so many Masses and feasts are to be celebrated, the nuns as well as the people are much consoled. Had I paid attention to the vain opinions of the world, it would have been impossible, from what we can understand, for us to be so well provided for, and I would have offended the one who with so much good will did this charitable deed for us.
