CHAPTER 20
 
Treats of the foundation of the monastery, Our Lady of the Annunciation, in Alba de Tormes. It was made in the year 1571.
 
1. Two months had not yet passed since the feast of All Saints (the day on which possession was taken of the house in Salamanca) when I received an urgent request from the administrator for the Duke of Alba and his wife that a monastery be founded in the town of Alba. I was not too keen about the idea because the town was a small one, which would make it necessary for us to have an income, and my inclination was not to have one. Father Master Fray Domingo Báñez (who had been my confessor, whom I consulted when beginning these foundations) happened to be in Salamanca, and he reprimanded me and told me that since the Council had given permission it would not be right to forego the foundation of a monastery because of a need for an income. He said further that I failed to understand that whether the monaster y had an income or not made little difference in regard to nuns being poor and very perfect.
Before I say more, I shall mention who the foundress was and how the Lord moved her to make the foundation.
2. The foundress of the monastery, Our Lady of the Annunciation, was Teresa de Layz, a daughter of noble parents, hidalgos of pure blood. Since her parents were not as rich as would be expected considering the nobility of their lineage, they had their house in a place called Tordillos, which is two leagues from the said town of Alba. It is a great pity that the world is so influenced by vanity that people would prefer to remain in these little villages where there is a lack of Christian doctrine and of many other things that are means to the enlightenment of souls, than to fail even one iota in those punctilios that accompany what they call honor. Since the parents already had four daughters when Teresa de Layz was born, they were much distressed to see that she also was a daughter.
3. Certainly, it is something to be much wept over that human beings do not know what is best for them and are totally ignorant of the judgments of God and of the great blessings that can come to them through daughters or of the great sufferings that can come from sons. It doesn't seem they want to leave this matter to the One who creates their children and understands everything, but they kill themselves over what should be making them happy. As people whose faith is asleep, they do not reflect or recall that it is God who thus ordains, and so they do not leave everything in His hands. And being so blind that they do not do this, they suffer great ignorance in not understanding how little these afflictions help them. Oh, God help me! How differently will we understand these ignorances on the day when the truth about all things shall be understood. And how many fathers and mothers will be seen going to hell because they had sons and also how many will be seen in heaven because of their daughters.
4. Well, to return to what I was saying, things came to the point that on the third day after her birth they left their baby girl alone and forgot about her for the entire day, from morning until night, as though she mattered little to them. One thing they had done well was to have her baptized by a priest as soon as she was born. When at night, a woman came who was taking care of the baby and knew what was going on, she hastened to see if the child was dead. Some other persons who had gone there to visit the mother were also witnesses to what I shall now tell. Weeping, the woman took the baby into her arms and complaining of the cruelty said: "How is it, my daughter, are you not a Christian?" The baby girl lifted her head and answered, "Yes, I am," and spoke no more until reaching that age at which all children begin to speak. Those who heard her were amazed, and her mother began to love and cherish her from then on, and she often said that she would like to live to see what God would do with this child. She reared her daughter in keeping with high moral standards and taught her everything about virtue.
5. When the time came that her parents wanted her to marry, she refused, nor did she have any desire at all to get married. She happened to find out that Francisco Valazquez, now her husband, who is also the founder of this house, was seeking her. In hearing his name, she decided to marry if she could marry him, never having seen him in her life. But His Majesty saw that this was fitting so that the good work both of them did in order to serve Him could be done. Besides being a virtuous and rich man, Francisco Velázquez loves his wife so much that he seeks to please her in everything. And rightly so, for all that one can seek in a married woman the Lord gave to him in great abundance. Along with the diligent care she takes of her household, her goodness is so great that when her husband brought her to his native town of Alba and the duke's housing administrators happened to arrange that lodging be given in her house to a young gentleman, she was very upset and began to abhor the town.
For being youthful and attractive in appearance, she could have been the victim of some evil deed since the devil began to put bad thoughts in that gentleman's mind.
6. Aware of this, but without saying anything to her husband, she asked him to take her away from there. He did so and brought her to Salamanca where she lived very happily, surrounded by much of the world's goods, since he held a position that made others want to please and flatter him. They had but one sorrow, that God had not given them children. That He might give them, she offered many devotions and prayers. And she never begged the Lord for anything else but that He give her offspring so that after her death her children could continue the praise of His Majesty, for it seemed to her unfortunate that this praise would end with her and that there would be no one after her days to praise Him. And she told me that there wasn't any other desire that came to her mind. And she is a woman who is so truthful and good a Christian and virtuous, as I have said, that it often makes me praise our Lord to see her works and her great desires never to fail to use her time well and to please Him always.
7. Well, then, living many years with this desire and recommending it to St. Andrew, who, she was informed, is a patron of such causes, and after many other devotions that she had offered, she was told one night while lying down: "Do not desire children, for you will be condemned." She was left frightened and fearful. But not for this reason did the desire leave her, for it seemed to her that since her purpose was so good there would be no reason for her to be condemned. So she continued to beg our Lord. Especially, she carried out a particular devotion to St. Andrew. Once, while experiencing this desire, though she doesn't know whether she was awake or asleep (whatever may be the case, it is clear that the vision was true from what followed), it seemed to her that she was in a house where on the patio beneath the gallery was a well. And she saw in that place a green meadow with white flowers, so beautiful she wouldn't be able to describe what she saw. Near the well, St. Andrew appeared in the form of a very venerable and handsome person, for it gave her great delight to look on him, and he said to her: "These are children other than those you desire." She did not want the great consolation she felt in that place to end; but it did not last. And she understood clearly that the vision was of St. Andrew, without anyone telling her; and also that our Lord willed that she found a monastery. Hence it can be understood that the vision was an intellectual as well as an imaginative one, nor could it have been either a whim or an illusion caused by the devil.
8. First, the vision was not a whim; this can be deduced from its great effect, for from that point on she never more desired children. She remained so convinced in her heart that this was God's will that she no longer asked for or desired them. Thus she began to think about the way in which she could do what the Lord wanted. Nor was it an illusion caused by the devil. This can be discerned from the fact that a monastery is now founded where our Lord is much served, for the devil of himself cannot do good. In addition, this took place more than six years before the monastery was founded, and the devil cannot know the future.
9. Very surprised by this vision, she told her husband that since God did not desire to give them children they should found a monastery of nuns. Being so good and loving her so much, he husband was happy with the idea and began to consider where they might found one. She wanted it in the town where she had been born. He put up legitimate objections to convince her that her own town would not be a good place for it.
10. While they were discussing this, the Duchess of Alba called for him. When he arrived, she ordered him to return to Alba to undertake duties in her house, and he accepted the office even though it was a less important one than the office he had held in Salamanca. When his wife heard about it, she was very distressed because, as I said, she abhorred Alba. Being assured by her husband that they would not accept guests any more, she was somewhat appeased; although she was still very troubled since Salamanca was more to her liking. He bought a house and sent for her. She came with great weariness and felt wearier when she saw the house. For although the location was very good and the property extensive, the house did not have enough rooms; thus she was very troubled that night. The next morning, when she walked onto the patio, she saw on the same side the well where she had seen St. Andrew. And she saw everything else, no more nor less than what had been shown to her -- I mean the place, not the saint or the flowers or the meadow, although she did have and still has them well imprinted in her imagination.
11. When she saw these things, she became troubled and resolved to found the monastery there. She did this now with great consolation and tranquility, without wanting to go somewhere else, and they began to buy more houses nearby until they had ample land. She was concerned about which order they would ask, for she wanted the nuns to be few and strictly enclosed. In discussing the matter with two religious from different orders, who were very good and learned men, she was told by both that it would be better to do some other good works because nuns are usually unhappy. And she was told many other things, for since the project saddened the devil he wanted to prevent it, and thus he made them think that the reasons they gave her were very sound. Since they presented so many as to why it wouldn't be good, and the devil presented more in order to hinder it, she became fearful and disturbed and decided not to go ahead. This she told to her husband, and the two of them felt that since such men had told her that it would not be good and her intention was to serve our Lord they should forget about it. Thus they agreed to arrange for a marriage between a niece on her husband's side and a nephew of hers, who was very virtuous and still young and whom she loved very much, and give them a great part of their estate, keeping the rest for their own spiritual well-being. They were both left feeling certain and serene about this decision.
12. But since our Lord had ordained something else, their agreement was of little benefit. In less than fifteen days, the nephew became so seriously ill that within a very few days our Lord brought him to Himself. She became so convinced that the cause of her nephew's death had been her decision to set aside what God wanted her to do, in order to leave the estate to him, that she felt great fear. She recalled what happened to Jonah the prophet for not having wanted to obey God, and it seemed to her that God had punished her by taking away that nephew whom she loved so much. From that day on she was determined not to let anything make her fail to found the monastery, and her husband was also; although they didn't know how to go about it. It seemed to her that God had put into her heart what has now been accomplished. Those whom she told about the monastery, and to whom she described how she wanted it, laughed over the matter since they thought she would not find the things she was looking for; this was true especially of a confessor of hers, a Franciscan friar, a distinguished man of learning. She was very dejected.
13. At that time, this friar happened to go to a certain town where he was told about these monasteries of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel that were now being founded. Very well informed about them, he returned and told her he had now discovered how she could found the monastery she desired. He told what had happened and that she should try to speak with me about it. This she did. We underwent much difficulty in trying to come to an agreement. For in the case of monasteries founded with an income, my goal always was that they have enough to keep the nuns from dependence on relatives, or on anyone, and that food and clothing and everything necessary be given to them in the house, and that the sick be very well cared for. For when necessities are lacking, many troubles arise. In founding many monasteries in poverty, without an income, I never lack courage or confidence; I am certain that God will not fail them. In founding them with an income that is small, everything fails me; I find it better that they not be founded.
14. She and her husband finally became reasonable and offered enough revenue to provide for the number of nuns. And what I highly appreciated, they left their own house in order to give it to us and moved into one that was in a dilapidated condition. The Blessed Sacrament was reserved and the foundation was made on the feast of the Conversion of St. Paul, in the year 1571, for the glory and honor of God. In this foundation, in my opinion, His Majesty is very much served. May it please Him to protect it always.
15. I began to say some particular things about some of the Sisters in these monasteries thinking that when this would be read those now living in them would not be alive and that those who come after would be inspired to carry on in the tradition of such a good beginning. Afterward, it has seemed to me, there will be someone who will tell these things better and in more detail and without having the fear that I have had of giving the impression of being partial. And so I have left out many things considered miraculous by those who had seen or known of them, for such things are supernatural. I have not wanted to say anything about them or of what our Lord has been clearly seen to do through the nuns' prayers.
In the account of the dates on which these monasteries were founded I suspect that I am sometimes mistaken, although I try diligently to remember. Since these dates are not of great importance, because they can be corrected afterward, I put them down according to what I can remember; it makes little difference if there is some error.

CHAPTER 21
 
Treats of the foundation in Segovia of the Carmel of the glorious St. Joseph. It was founded on the very feast of St. Joseph in 1574.
 
1. I have already mentioned how after I founded the monasteries of Salamanca and Alba and before we had our own house in Salamanca, the Father Maestro Fray Pedro Fernández, who was then the apostolic commissary, ordered me to go to the Incarnation in Avila for three years. I also mentioned that when he saw the need of the nuns in Salamanca for a house, he ordered me to go there so that they could move into one of their own. One day while I was there in prayer, our Lord told me to go to Segovia and make a foundation. This seemed impossible to me, for I could not go unless ordered to do so, and I had learned from the apostolic commissary, the Father Maestro Fray Pedro Fernández, that he did not want me to make any more foundations. I also saw clearly that since the three years I was to stay in the Incarnation were not over, he had great reason for not wanting any more foundations. While I was thinking about this, the Lord told me to tell him and that He Himself would bring this foundation about.
2. At the time, I was in Salamanca. From there I wrote to His Paternity reminding him that he already knew I had a command from our most Reverend Father General to make a foundation when I saw that there was an opportunity for doing so. I mentioned that one of these monasteries had been accepted in Segovia by both the city and the bishop, that if His Paternity would give the order I would found it, that I was pointing this out to him to satisfy my conscience, and that I would feel confident and content with whatever he ordered. I believe these were the words, more or less, and I added that it seemed to me the monastery would render service to God. I think, indeed, that His Majesty wanted it, because the apostolic commissary said immediately that I should found it, and he gave me permission. From what I had known about him in regard to these matters, I was very much amazed. And from Salamanca I arranged that they rent me a house, for after the experience in Toledo and Valladolid I had learned that it was better to rent a house and take possession first and then look for one to buy. This was so for many reason, the principal one being that I didn't have a cent to buy one with. Once the monastery was founded, the Lord would then provide; also, a more appropriate site could be chosen.
3. There was a lady there who had been the wife of the owner of an entailed estate. Her name was Doña Ana de Jimena. She had once come to see me in Avila. She was a good servant of God, and her calling had always been to be a nun. Thus after the founding of the monastery, she and one of her daughters, who was living a devout life, entered it. And the Lord took away the unhappiness she had experienced both while married and as a widow and gave her a double measure of happiness in the religious life. Both mother and daughter had always been very recollected and faithful servants of God.
4. This good lady acquired the house and provided for everything she saw we needed, both for the church and for ourselves. As a result, I had little work to do. But there is never a foundation in which there is not some trial. And the trial came in addition to the fact that I went there while suffering from a high fever and nausea, and from interior ills of very great dryness and darkness of soul, and from bodily complaints of many kinds, the intensity of which lasted three months. And for the half year that I was there, I was always sick.
5. On the feast of St. Joseph, we reserved the Blessed Sacrament. Although we had permission from both the bishop and the city, I did not want to enter except on the eve of the feast, secretly, and at night. Much time had passed since the permission had been given, but because I had been at the Incarnation and did not have our Father General for superior, but someone else, I had not been able to make the foundation. The permission I had received from the bishop of the place -- when he agreed -- was in word. He gave it through a gentleman named Andrés de Jimena who was looking for a house for us. But this gentleman didn't bother about getting the permission in writing, nor did this seem to me to matter. I was mistaken, for when the vicar general learned that the monastery had been founded, he came at once, very angry, and did not allow Mass to be said any more and wanted to take prisoner the one who said it, a discalced friar, who came with both Father Julián de Avila and another servant of God, who came with me, named Antonio Gaytán.
6. This latter was a gentleman from Alba. He was called by the Lord some years before while very much involved in the world. He so trampled it under foot that all he thought about was how to serve the Lord more. In the foundations that will be dealt with from here on, mention will have to be made of him, for he helped me much and did a great deal of work for me. I have told who he is, and if I should have to tell of his virtues, I would not finish very quickly. What mattered most to us was that he was so mortified, for there was no servant from among those who came with us who was as ready as he was to do all the necessary things. He is a man of deep prayer, and God has granted him so many favors that everything others would consider a burden made him happy and was easy for him to accept. This is the way he is in all the work that he has done for these foundations. For it indeed seems that God called both him and Father Julián de Avila for this purpose, although Father Julián de Avila was with us from the first foundation. By giving me company like this, our Lord must have desired that everything turn out well for me. It was Father Julián's characteristic while traveling to speak of God and to teach those who traveled with us or whom we met, and thus in every way he served His Majesty.
7. It is only right, my daughters, that those of you who read these foundations should know what you owe to these two (for without any self-interest they labored so much for this good that you enjoy, of being in these monasteries) in order that you might recommended them to our Lord and they might receive some benefit from your prayers. For if you knew the bad nights and days they suffered, and the trials on the roads, you would do so very willingly.
8. The vicar general did not want to go away without leaving a guard at the door of the church. I don't know why; it served to frighten a little those who were there. As for me, I was never much bothered by what happened once possession of the foundation had taken place; all my fears came before. I sent for some persons, relatives of a companion I brought from among my sisters, who were renowned in that place that they might speak to the vicar general and explain to him that I had permission from the bishop. He knew this very well, as he said afterward, but he thought we should have informed him. I believe that had we done so, things would have been much worse. Finally, they got him to agree to let us stay in the monastery, but he removed the Blessed Sacrament. This didn't matter to us. We remained thus for some months until a house was bought; along with it came many lawsuits. We had lawsuits with the Mercedarians and, because the house had an annuity attached to it, with the cathedral chapter. Before this we had many difficulties with the Franciscan friars because of a house we tried to buy near them.
9. O Jesus! What a trial it is to have to contend with many opinions. When the litigation would seem to be over, it would begin anew because it wasn't enough to give them what they asked for; there was at once some other difficulty. Explained in this way, it all seems like nothing; but going through it was much different.
10. A nephew of the bishop did all that he could for us, for he was the prior and canon of that church; and so, too, did the licentiate Herrera, a very great servant of God. Finally, after we gave much money, the lawsuit came to an end. We were left with the lawsuit of the Mercedarians, for in order to move to the new house great secrecy was necessary. When they found out that we were there, for we had moved a day or two before the feast of St. Michael, they thought it would be good to settle for a sum of money. The greatest suffering that these obstacles caused me was that in no more than seven or eight days my three years as prioress at the Incarnation were to come to an end, and I necessarily had to be there.
11. Our Lord was pleased that everything should turn out so well that no contention remained, and within two or three days I was at the Incarnation. May His name be ever blessed who has always granted me so many favors, and may all creatures praise Him. Amen.

CHAPTER 22
 
Treats of the foundation named after the glorious St. Joseph of the Savior and made in the town of Beas on the feast of St. Matthias in the year 1575.
 
1. When I was sent, as mentioned, from the Incarnation to Salamanca, a messenger came there from the town of Beas with letters for me from a lady in that area and from the curate beneficiary there. The letters contained both the offer of a benefice from that town and requests from other persons asking me to come and found a monastery. They already had a house; all that was needed was to go and make the foundation.
2. When questioned by me, the man recounted wonderful things about the land, and rightly so, for it is very delightful and has a good climate. But in considering the distance, many leagues from here, the notion of making a foundation there seemed to me foolish. Especially so, since I was under the orders of the apostolic commissary, who, as I mentioned, was opposed to, or at least not in favor of, my making foundations. So I wanted to answer that I was unable, and avoid asking permission of the apostolic commissary about it. Afterward, it seemed to me that since he was present at that time in Salamanca and I had received the order from our Reverend Father General not to fail to make foundations, it would be unwise to refuse without getting his opinion.
3. When he saw the letters brought to me by the messenger, he sent word that he didn't think it would be good to disappoint them, that he had been edified by their devotion, that I should write telling them that when they had permission from the Order of Knights of that town, provisions would be made for the foundation. He was certain that the council of the Order of Knights would not give the permission, for he had known from elsewhere that in many years no one had been able to receive such a permission from it, and he did not want my answer to sound like a refusal. Sometimes I think about this and how that which our Lord wants, even though we may not want it, comes about in such a way that without our being aware we are the instruments of it. In this case the instrument was the Father Maestro Fray Pedro Fernández, who was the commissary. And so when they received the permission from the council, he couldn't refuse. The foundation was made in this way.
4. This monastery of the blessed St. Joseph was founded in the town of Beas on the feast of St. Matthias in the year 1575. It came about for the honor and glory of God in the following way.
There was in this town a gentleman named Sancho Rodríguez de Sandoval, of noble lineage and having many temporal possessions. He was married to a lady named Doña Catalina Godínez. Among the children that our Lord gave them were two daughters, those who founded this monastery. The older was fourteen when our Lord called her to His service. Up to this age she was far from ready to leave the world; on the contrary, she had such a high estimation of herself that all that her father sought for her in marriages seemed of small account.
5. One day while in a room next to the one in which her father was lying down, she happened to read on a crucifix the inscription that is placed over the cross. Suddenly when she read it, the Lord worked a complete change in her: She had been thinking of a marriage that was being sought for her, which was better than she could have hoped for, and saying to herself: "With what little my father is content, that I become connected with an entailed estate; I am thinking of becoming the origin of a new line of descendants." She was not inclined toward marriage, for she considered it demeaning to be subject to someone; nor did she know where this pride came from. The Lord knew how it could be remedied. Blessed be His mercy.
6. The moment she read the inscription, it seemed to her that just as sunshine enters a dark room, a light came into her soul by which she understood the truth. With this light she set her eyes on the Lord who was on the cross shedding blood, and she thought about how badly He was treated and of His great humility and about how different the road of pride was that she was following. There must have been some space of time in which the Lord suspended her. There His Majesty gave her a deep knowledge of her own misery, and she desired that all might know of it. He gave her so great a desire to suffer for God that all that the martyrs suffered she desired to suffer with them. She experienced such profound humiliation and self-abhorrence that were it not an offense against God, she would have wanted to be a very dissolute woman so that all might abhor her. Thus she began to despise herself with great desires for penance, which afterward she put into effect. She at once promised chastity and poverty and wanted to see herself so subject that she would have rejoiced to be carried off then to the land of the Moors and remain there. All of these virtues lasted in her in such a way that the experience was clearly seen to be a supernatural favor from our Lord, as will be said later, so that all might praise Him.
7. May You be blessed forever and ever, my God, for within a moment You undo a soul and remake it. What is this, Lord? I would want to ask here what the apostles asked You when You cured the blind man, whether it was his parents who had sinned. I mean, who could have merited so sublime a favor? She certainly did not, for it was already mentioned what thoughts You took away from her when You granted that favor. Oh, great are Your judgments, Lord! You know what You are doing, but I do not know what I am saying since Your works and judgments are in incomprehensible. May You be ever glorified, for You have the power to do even more. What would become of me if this were not so? But, did the merit in some way come from her mother? For so great was her mother's practice of Christianity that it would be possible that Your goodness, being merciful, would desire that she see within her lifetime this great virtue in her daughters. Sometimes I think You grant similar favors to those who love You, and You do them so much good that You give them that by which they may serve You.
8. While she was in this state, such a loud noise came from the room above that it seemed everything was falling down. It seemed that all of that noise was coming down in the corner where she was, and she heard some roars that lasted quite a while. They were such that her father who although he had not yet got up, as was mentioned, became so frightened he began to tremble. As though beside himself, he took a robe and his sword and entered there and very much shaken asked her what that noise was. She told him that she hadn't seen anything. He looked in the next room further and since he saw nothing told her to go stay with her mother and informed her mother about what he had heard and not to let their daughter be alone.
9. This indeed explains what the devil must feel when he sees a soul already considered to be his own loosed from his power. Since he is so hostile toward what is good for us, I am not surprised that in seeing our merciful Lord grant so many favors all at once he should become frightened and make such a show of his feeling. This was especially so, because he understood that on account of the riches that were left in that soul he had to remain without any that could be considered his. For I hold that our Lord never grants so great a favor to a person without allowing others to share in it as well. She never said anything about this. But she was left with the strongest desire to embrace religious life and frequently sought permission from her parents to do so. They would never give their consent.
10. After three years had gone by in which she frequently sought permission, she began, on the feast of St. Joseph, to dress in a simple manner since she saw that they did not want her to be a religious. She told only her mother from whom it would have been easy to obtain the permission to be a nun. As for her father, she did not dare ask, but she went to the church so that once the townspeople had seen her in this dress, she could be sure her parents would not take it away. And this is what happened, for they let the matter go. During those three years, she observed hours of prayer and mortified herself in every way she could, for the Lord taught her. She used to enter the courtyard and throw water on her face and then expose it to the sun so that because of the resulting ugly appearance her parents would give up the idea of a marriage for her, for she was still being urged to marry.
11. She no longer had any desire to give orders to anyone. Since she had charge of her father's house, it happened that when she realized that she had given orders to the housemaids, for she couldn't do otherwise, she would wait until they were asleep and kiss their feet, anxious because they, though better than she, were serving her. Since during the day she was busy with her parents, when it was time for sleep, she would spend the whole night in prayer. Thus, she often went with so little sleep that it would have been impossible for her to do so without supernatural aid. The penance and the disciplines were many because she had no one to guide her nor did she speak with anyone. Among other things, one Lent she wore her father's coat of mail next to her flesh. She used to go to a secluded place to pray, where the devil heaped ridicule on her. Often she began prayer at ten at night and was absorbed in it until daylight.
12. She spent about four years in these exercises. Then, desiring that she serve Him through other greater ones the Lord gave her most serious and painful illnesses. Thus she suffered from continual fever, dropsy, heart trouble, and a breast tumor which was removed. In sum, these illnesses lasted almost seventeen years; there were but few days in which she felt well. Five years after she had received the above favor from God, her father died. Her sister, when fourteen (one year after Doña Catalina had made this change) also put on a simple garb, for she had been fond of fine clothes, and began as well to practice prayer. Her mother helped them in all their good practices and desires. She thought that it was good for them to become occupied in a very virtuous work, one that was far out of harmony with their status: teaching girls needlework and reading, without any fee, but only for the opportunity to instruct the girls in prayer and doctrine. Their work was very fruitful because many girls were helped, and even now the good habits these girls learned when small are visible. The good work didn't continue for long because the devil, saddened by it, made the parents of the little girls feel that it was an affront for their daughters to be taught free of charge. This along with the beginning of the illnesses that afflicted her caused her to discontinue the work.
13. Five years after the father of these young ladies died, their mother died. Doña Catalina had always felt called to be a nun, but she could not get her parents' consent. She now wanted to go away at once to be a nun. Since there was no monastery in Beas, her relatives counselled her that since they had the sufficient means they should strive to found a monastery in their own town, that this would be of greater service to our Lord. Since the town is a commandery of the Order of the Knights of Santiago, permission was necessary from the council of this order, and so she diligently sought to obtain it.
14. It was so difficult to obtain that they spent four years in which they underwent many trials and expenses; and until a petition was sent to the king himself, nothing proved helpful. And it happened that because the difficulty became so great, her relatives began to tell her that the idea was foolish and that she should forget about it. Since she was almost always in bed with such serious illnesses, as was mentioned, they said that no monastery would accept her as a nun. She answered that if within a month our Lord gave her health they should understand thereby that He would be served by the monastery and that she would go to the royal court herself to obtain the license. When she said this, it had been more than half a year that she had not got out of bed; and for almost eight years she had hardly moved from it. During those eight years she suffered from a continual fever, consumption, tuberculosis, dropsy, and an inflammation of the liver. This latter could be felt, and it so burned that even her clothes were affected by it and her chemise scorched. This seems incredible, and I myself inquired of the doctor about these illnesses that she had at that time, for I was amazed. She also suffered from gout and sciatica.
15. On the eve of the feast of St. Sebastian, which was a Saturday, our Lord gave her such complete health that she didn't know how to conceal it and prevent the miracle from being known. She says that when our Lord desired to cure her He gave her an interior trembling that made her sister think that her life was coming to an end. And she saw within herself the greatest change, and in her soul, she says, she felt another change which was beneficial to her. Because of her health she was able to attend to the business of the monastery, and this made her happier than did her feeling of good health. From the beginning when God called her, He gave an abhorrence of self, for she made little of all. She says she was left with so powerful a desire to suffer that she begged God earnestly to exercise her in suffering in every way.
16. His Majesty did not fail to fulfill this desire. During those eight years they bled her more than five hundred times, without counting the many cuppings; the body shows them clearly. They put salt in the wounds, for the doctor said it was good for drawing the poison from a sore of her side; they did this more than twenty times. What is more amazing is that as soon as she was told that the doctor prescribed one of these remedies, she fearlessly longed for the time to come in which they would carry it out, and she encouraged the doctors to apply the cauteries, which were used often for a breast cancer and other purposes. She says that what made her want this was the desire to prove whether or not the longings she had for martyrdom were authentic.
17. Since she found that she had suddenly become well she discussed with both her confessor and doctor the possibility of being brought to another town so that they could say the change of environment had caused the cure. They did not want to do so; on the contrary, they spread the news. They had already judged her to be incurable because the blood she was spitting up was so putrefied that they said it contained part of the lungs. She remained in bed for three days, not daring to get up lest the miracles of her health become known. But since it could be no more disguised than could her illness, the attempt to hide it was of little benefit.
18. She told me that the previous August while begging our Lord either to take away her great desire both to be a nun and to found a monastery or give her the means to do so she was convincingly assured that she would be well in time to go, during Lent, to obtain the license. Thus, she says that at that time even though the illnesses weighed more heavily on her, she never lost the hope that our Lord was going to grant her this favor. Even though she was anointed twice (one time she was so close to the end that the doctor said there would be no reason to go for the oils, that she would be dead before they arrived), she never stopped trusting in the Lord that she would die a nun. I don't mean that they anointed her twice between August and the feast of St. Sebastian, but before that.
When her brothers and relatives saw the favor and miracle that the Lord had performed in giving her health so suddenly, they did not dare prevent her from going, although it seemed foolish. She was at the royal court for three months, and in the end the license was not given. When she presented this petition to the king and he learned that it was for discalced Carmelite nuns, he ordered that it be given at once.
19. When the time came to found the monastery, it seemed obvious that she had obtained this from God, for the superiors accepted it even though the town was so far away and the income small. What His Majesty desires cannot be set aside. Thus the nuns came at the beginning of Lent in 1575. The people of the town received them with a solemn procession and great joy. The happiness was so universal that even the children showed that our Lord would be served by this work. The monastery was founded under the patronage of St. Joseph of the Savior this same Lent on the feast of St. Matthias.
20. On the same day the two sisters received the habit with much joy. The health of Doña Catalina continued to improve. Her humility, obedience, and wish to be despised show clearly that her desires had been authentic and for the service of our Lord. May He be glorified forever and ever, amen.
21. This Sister told me, among other things, that almost twenty years ago she went to bed one night longing to find the most perfect religious order there was on earth so as to be a nun in it. She began to dream, in her opinion, that she was walking along a very straight and narrow road, very dangerous in that one could fall into some deep ravines that appeared. She met a discalced friar. (Seeing Fray Juan de la Miseria, a little friar, lay brother of the order who was in Beas while I was there, she said that he seemed to be the same one she had seen in the dream). He said to her, "Come with me, sister," and brought her to a house with a great number of nuns in which there was no other light than that coming from some candles they were carrying. She asked what order this was; all remained silent, and then they lifted their veils and their faces were joyous and they were laughing. And she declares that she saw the faces of the same Sisters she now sees, and that the prioress took her by the hand and said to her, "Daughter, I want you here," and showed her the constitutions and the rule. When she awoke from this sleep, she felt a happiness that made her think she had been in heaven, and she wrote down what she remembered from the rule. Much time passed in which she didn't tell her confessor or anyone, and no one knew anything about this religious order.
22. When a Father from the Society who knew of her desires came there, she showed him the paper and told him that if he found that religious order she would like to enter it. He knew of these monasteries and told her how what was written was taken from the rule of the order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel; although he didn't explain things to her so clearly, but just spoke of the monasteries that I was founding. Thus she arranged to send me a messenger as was mentioned.
23. When they brought her the reply, she was so sick that her confessor told her to be calm and that even if she were in the monastery they would dismiss her, how much less would they accept her now. She was terribly distressed and turned to our Lord with great anxieties and said to Him: "My Lord and my God, I know through faith that You are He who can do all things; well, then, Life of my soul, either take away these desires or give me the means to carry them out." She said this with extreme confidence, begging our Lady through the sorrow she felt when she beheld her dead Son in her arms, to intercede for her. She heard a voice within her say: "Believe and hope for I am He who can do all things; you will be healthy, for He who had the power to prevent so many illnesses, each deadly in itself, from bringing about their effect will more easily take them away." She says that these words came with such force and certitude that she couldn't doubt that her desire would be granted, even though many more illnesses weighed her down until the Lord gave her the health we have mentioned. Certainly, what she has suffered seems incredible. Had I not been informed by the doctor and those who were in the house, or by other persons, being as wretched as I am, it would not have been unusual for me to think that some of this was exaggerated.
24. Although she is weak, she is now healthy enough to keep the rule. She is a good subject and has a very happy disposition and, as I have said, is humble in everything, which makes us all praise our Lord. The inheritance of each of them was given to the order without any conditions, so that even if they were not admitted to profession the money would still belong to the order. The detachment she has from both her relatives and property is great. And she always has the strong desire to move far away, and thus she begs this of her major superiors very much, although her obedience is so great that she is happily willing to remain there. And in this same spirit she received the white veil; for there was no way of getting her to become a choir Sister, but she wanted to be a lay Sister. This was so until I wrote to her telling her many things, scolding her because she wanted something other than what was her Father Provincial's will. I told her that wanting to be a lay sister was not more meritorious, and I mentioned other things, and dealt with her harshly. And this is her greatest happiness, to be spoken to harshly. As a result she submitted, very much against her will, to becoming to choir Sister. I don't know anything about this soul that does not have to do with her trying to be more pleasing to God, and all the nuns feel the same way. May it please His Majesty to keep her in His hands and increase the grace and virtues He has given her for His greater service and honor. Amen.

CHAPTER 23
 
Treats of the foundation of the monastery of the glorious St. Joseph of Carmel in Seville. The first Mass was said on the feast of the most Blessed Trinity in 1575.
 
1. While I was in this town of Beas waiting for the license from the Council of the Order of Knights for the foundation of Caravaca, a Father from the discalced of our order named Maestro Jerónimo Gracián de la Madre de Dios came to see me. A few years before he had received our religious habit while in Alcalá. Throughout his life he has been a man of much learning, intelligence, and modesty along with other great virtues. It seems, while he was in Alcalá, that he was chosen by our Lady for the good of this primitive order without his having the remotest idea of receiving our habit, although he had considered entering the religious life. His parents had other intentions because of his great talent and their good standing with the king, but he was far from being inclined toward their plans for him. From the time he began school, he was urged by his father to take up the study of law. Yet, while still very young, he felt so strongly the desire to study theology that by force of tears he got his father to allow him to do so.
2. After graduating with a master's degree, he took steps to enter the Society of Jesus, and they had accepted him. But for a certain reason they told him to wait several days. He tells me that he was tormented by all the enjoyments in his life and that he didn't think they constituted a safe path to heaven. He always set aside the hours for prayer and was extremely recollected and upright.
3. At this time a close friend of his entered the monastery in Pastrana to become a friar in our order. This friend's name was Fray Juan de Jesús, and he, too, had a master's degree. I don't know how the interest began, whether it did so because of a letter Fray Juan wrote about the greatness and antiquity of our order or in some other way; for Father Gracián enjoyed very much reading everything about the order and verifying, through important authors, what was asserted. He says that he often had scruples about failing to study other things because he was unable to set these studies aside, and he occupied his hours of recreation in this way. O wisdom and power of God! How impossible for us to flee from His will! Our Lord truly saw the great need there was for a person like this to carry on the work that He had begun. I often praise Him for the favor He granted us in this matter. Had I very much desired to ask His Majesty for a person to organize all the things pertaining to the order in these initial stages, I would not have succeeded in asking for all that He in fact gave in Father Gracián. May the Lord be blessed forever.
4. Well then, while not having the slightest thought of taking the habit of this order, he was asked to go to Pastrana to speak to the prioress of our monastery there -- for it had not yet been abandoned -- that she might accept a nun. What means the divine Majesty takes! For had Father Gracián decided to go there to take the habit, he would perhaps have met with so much opposition that he might never have done so. But the Blessed Virgin, our Lady, to whom he is extremely devoted, wanted to repay him by giving him her habit. So I think she was the mediatrix through whom God granted him this favor. And this glorious Virgin was the reason he received it and became so fond of the order. She did not want one who desired to serve her so much to lack the occasion for putting this desire into practice. It is her custom to favor those who want to be protected by her.
5. While still a boy in Madrid, he often went to pray before an image of our Lady to whom he had great devotion. I don't remember where it was; he called her "his love," and his visits were very frequent. She must have obtained for him from her Son the purity in which he always lived. He says that sometimes it seemed to him his eyes were swollen from weeping over the many offenses committed against her Son. As a result there arose in him a strong impulse and desire to help souls, and he felt it very deeply when he saw offenses committed against God. He has so great an inclination toward the good of souls that any hardship becomes small to him if he thinks that through it he can produce some fruit. I have seen this myself in the many trials that he has undergone.
6. Well, the Virgin brought him to Pastrana as though by tricking him into the thought that he was going there in order to request the habit for a nun. And God brought him there in order to give him the habit. Oh, secrets of God! But how true that without our desiring it, He disposes us so as to give us favors. And this soul was repaid for the good deeds that he did, for the good example that he had always given, and for his great desire to serve the Lord's glorious Mother. His Majesty must always repay this latter with wonderful rewards.
7. Well, when he arrived in Pastrana, he went to speak to the prioress that she might accept the nun; and it seemed as though he had asked her to pray to the Lord that he himself might enter. For he is a very pleasant person so that generally he is loved by those who have dealings with him -- it is a grace our Lord gives -- and thus he is extremely loved by all his subjects, both friars and nuns. Yet he doesn't let any fault go by, for he is extraordinarily careful in looking out for the welfare of the religious life. In his actions he is so gentle and pleasant that it seems no one is able to complain about him.
8. Well, when this prioress saw him, that which happened to others happened to her; she felt a strong desire that he enter the order and told the Sisters how important it was to get him to join, for at the time there were very few, or almost none like him. And she told them all to beseech our Lord not to let him go without his receiving the habit.
This prioress is a very great servant of God. By her prayer alone I think she would have been heard by His Majesty; how much more would the prayers of nuns as good as those that were there be heard. All of them took the matter very much to heart and with fasts, disciplines, and prayer begged His Majesty continually. Thus He was pleased to grant us this favor. For since Father Gracián went to the monastery of the friars and saw so much religious observance and opportunity to serve our Lord and above all that it was the order of the Lord's glorious Mother whom he so much desired to serve, his heart was moved not to return to the world. The devil set before him many difficulties, especially the pain this would bring his parents. They loved him very much and had great trust that he would help provide for their children, for they had many daughters and sons. He left this care to God for whom he left all, and decided to be a subject of the Virgin and take her habit. So they gave it to him amid the great happiness of all, especially of the nuns and the prioress. The nuns gave much praise to our Lord, thinking that His Majesty had granted them this favor through their prayers.
9. He spent the year of probation with the humility one would find among the youngest novices. His virtue was especially tried at a time when the prior was absent. A very young friar was in charge who had no learning, very little talent, and no prudence for governing. He was without experience since he had only recently entered. The manner in which he guided them was excessive as well as were the mortifications he made them perform. Every time I think of them I am amazed at how Father Gracián was able to suffer them, especially how he could put up with persons like that. The spirituality God gave him was necessary for this suffering. It was clearly seen afterward that the young friar was the victim of much melancholy, and nowhere was he free of it. Even as a subject, he's a source of trouble, how much more so when he governs! The humor has much control over him, for he is a good religious, and God sometimes permits this mistake of putting such persons in office so as to perfect the virtue of obedience in those He loves.
10. So it must have happened that as a reward God has given Father Fray Jerónimo de la Madre de Dios the greatest light in matters of obedience so that as one who had such a good initiation into its practice he might teach it to others. And that he might not lack experience in all the things we need to know about, he underwent the most severe temptations for three months prior to his profession. But as the good captain of the sons of the Virgin that he was to become, he defended himself well against these temptations. For when the devil harassed him most to get him to give up the habit, he defended himself by promising to make his vows and not give it up. He gave me a certain work that he wrote while undergoing those great temptations. It inspired me with much devotion, and the fortitude the Lord gave him is clearly seen.
11. It will seem inappropriate that he should have informed me of so many personal matters about his soul. Perhaps the Lord wanted this that I might record it here, and He might be praised in His creatures. For I know that neither to any confessor nor to any other person has this Father manifested so much about himself. At times he had reason for so doing because he thought that on account of my age and from what he had heard about me I had some experience. It was while we were speaking about other matters that he told me about these things and additional ones that cannot be suitably put in writing, for I would be going on at much greater length.
12. Certainly, I have used much restraint so that if this work should ever get into his hands he won't suffer pain. I couldn't help it, nor did it seem to me (for if this work is to be seen, it won't be for a long time yet) that one who did so much good for the renewal of the observance of the primitive rule should be forgotten. Although he was not the one who first began, he came along at the right moment. For sometimes I would have regretted ever having begun had it not been for the great confidence I had in the mercy of God. I'm referring to the houses of the friars, for those of the nuns, through God's goodness, have so far always gone well. Those of the friars were not going badly, but the basis was there for a very quick collapse. Since the discalced didn't have their own province, they were governed by the calced. Those who could have governed, such as Fray Antonio de Jesús, the one who began the renewal, were not given the power to do so. Nor did the friars have constitutions given by our most Reverend Father General. In each house they did as they saw fit. Until the day comes in which they can govern themselves they will have much trouble because some think one way and others another. At times I found them very tiring.
13. Our Lord provided a remedy through the Father Maestro Fray Jerónimo de la Madre de Dios, because they made him apostolic commissary and gave him authority and rule over the discalced friars and nuns. He drafted constitutions for the friars, for we already had ours from our most Reverend Father General, and so he did not draw up any for us. But he did draw them up for the friars through the apostolic power he had and the talents that the Lord has given him as I have mentioned. In his first visitation of the friars, he arranged everything with such moderation and harmony that it indeed seemed he was helped by the Divine Majesty and that our Lady had chosen him to help her order. I begged her very much to intercede that her Son always favor this Father and give him grace to advance far in His service. Amen.

CHAPTER 24
 
Continues with the foundation of St. Joseph of Carmel in the city of Seville.
 
1. When, as I mentioned, the Father Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián came to see me at Beas, we had never previously met although I had very much desired to meet him. (Yes, at times, we had corresponded.) I was extremely delighted when I learned he was there, for I greatly desired to meet him on account of the good reports given me concerning him. But much greater was my happiness when I began speaking with him, for it seemed from the way he pleased me that those who had praised him had hardly known him at all.
2. Since at that time I had so many difficulties, it seems that when I saw him the Lord showed me the good that was going to come to us through him. So during those days I went about with such excessive consolation and happiness that indeed I was surprised at myself. At that time he did not have authority outside Andalusia. It was when he was in Beas that the nuncio sent to see him and then gave him authority over the discalced friars and nuns of Castile. So much joy did my spirit feel that I couldn't thank our Lord enough those days, nor did I want to do anything else.
3. At this time they had brought the license for the foundation in Caravaca. The permission granted did not correspond with my proposal, and so it was necessary to petition the royal court again. For I had written to the foundresses that the foundation would in no way be made unless a certain missing detail were asked for, and so it was necessary to appeal again to the court. It cost me a great deal to wait there so long, and I wanted to return to Castile. But since Father Fray Jerónimo was there, to whom that monastery was subject, and since he was the commissary for the whole province of Castile, nothing could be done without his approval; so I talked to him about it.
4. He thought that if I were to leave, the foundation in Caravaca would fail, and also that a foundation in Seville would render great service to God. It seemed to him this latter would be very easy, for some well-to-do people had asked him and were able and wealthy enough to provide a house at once. The Archbishop of Seville so favored the order that Father Fray Jerónimo believed a foundation would render the order a great service. So it was arranged that the prioress and the nuns who were to go to Caravaca would instead go to Seville, although for certain reasons I had always strongly refused to found these monasteries in Andalusia. If when I went to Beas I had known that it was in Andalusia, I would by no means have gone. The mistake was that although the land was not yet within Andalusia, which I believe begins five or six leagues further, the ecclesiastical province was. Since I saw that a foundation in Seville was the resolve of my major superior, I immediately submitted, although I had decided on another foundation and had some very serious reasons against going to Seville. (This is a favor our Lord grants me, to have the opinion that these superiors are right in everything).
5. Preparations were immediately begun for the journey because it was beginning to get very hot. Father Apostolic Commissary, Gracián, responding to a call from the nuncio left for a meeting with him, and we for a journey to Seville with my good companions, Father Julián de Avila, Antonio Gaytán, and a discalced friar. We journeyed in wagons well covered, which was our mode of traveling, and when we reached an inn we took whatever room was available, good or bad. And one Sister received what we needed at the door, for not even those who journeyed with us entered the room.
6. Although we hurried along on our journey, we did not reach Seville until the Thursday before Trinity Sunday, after having endured scorching heat. Even though we did not travel during siesta time, I tell you, Sisters, that since the sun was beating on the wagons, getting into them was like stepping into purgatory. Sometimes by thinking of hell, at other times by thinking that something was being done and suffered for God, those Sisters journeyed with much happiness and joy. The six souls who were with me were of the kind that made me think I was daring enough to go off with them to the land of the Turks and that they had the fortitude, or better, our Lord gave them the fortitude, to suffer for Him; for this was the subject of their desires and conversations. They were very experienced in prayer and mortification. Since they had to remain so far away, I chose those who seemed to me to be the most apt. And this was all necessary because of the trials that were suffered. Some of the hardships and the greatest, I won't mention because another person might be involved.
7. One day before Pentecost, God gave them a severe trial by sending me a very high fever. I believed that their cries to God were enough to prevent the sickness from getting worse. Never before in my life had I experienced a fever like this without its growing worse. It made me think I had sleeping sickness so withdrawn did it make me. They threw water on my face, but being so hot from the sun, the water provided little refreshment.
8. I don't want to fail to mention the bad inn at which we stayed when I was in this condition. We were given a small room with just a bare tile roof. It had no window, and when the door was opened, the sun poured in everywhere. You must remember that the sun in that region is not like it is in Castile, but much more annoying. The bed on which they made me lie down was such that I would have fared better on the ground. One part was so high and the other so low that one didn't know how to stay in it; it was like lying on sharp stones. What a thing sickness is! For when we're healthy, it's easy to put up with all kinds of inconveniences. Finally I decided it would be better if I got up and we left. It seemed better to me to suffer the sun in the field than in that little room.
9. What will it be like for the poor ones who are in hell? Never will there be any change at all, for even a change from one trial to another brings with it some relief. It has happened to me that when after suffering from very severe pain in one place I experienced other pain elsewhere, the change seemed to provide some relief even though the pain was just as great; so it was in this instance. As for me, insofar as I remember, it didn't cause me any distress that I was sick; the Sisters suffered much more than I. The Lord was pleased that the severity of the fever did not last beyond that day.
10. A little before this -- I don't know whether it was two days -- something else happened to us which got us into a tight spot while we were crossing the Guadalquivir on a barge. When it was time for the wagon to cross, it was not possible to make a straight crossing where the rope was, but they had to wind their way across; the rope from the other shore was of some help by flowing with the barge. However, it happened that those who were holding the rope let it go, or I don't know what happened, for the barge went off with the wagon and without rope or oars. I felt much more concern in seeing the anxiety of the boatman than I did about the danger. We were all praying; the others were all screaming.
11. A gentleman watching us from a nearby castle was moved with pity and sent someone to help, for the barge then had not yet broken loose and our brothers were pulling, using all their strength; but the force of the water dragged them along to the point that some fell to the ground. Indeed, the boatman's son caused in me feelings of great devotion, which I never forget -- he must have been ten or eleven years old -- for the way he was working so hard upon seeing his father in this difficulty made me praise our Lord. But as His Majesty always gives trials in a compassionate way, so He did here. It happened that the boat got stuck on part of a sand bar where there was not much water; thus a rescue was made possible. Since nightfall had come, we would not have known how to continue our journey if someone from the castle had not come to guide us.
I had not thought of dealing with these things because they are of little importance, and I could have mentioned many bad incidents that occurred on our journeys. But I have been urged to enlarge on my account of this trip.
12. A much greater trial for me than those mentioned was what happened to us on the second day after Pentecost. We were hurrying to reach Córdoba in the morning so as to hear Mass without being seen by anyone. For the sake of greater solitude, they led us to a church located on the other side of a bridge. When we were about to cross the bridge, we found that on account of the wagons we needed a license which is issued by the magistrate. This took more than two hours since he was not up yet, and many people approached to find out who we were. This didn't bother us much because, since the wagons were well covered, the people were unable to do so. When the license finally came, we found that the wagons wouldn't fit through the gate of the bridge. It was necessary to saw them, or I don't know what, which took another while. When we finally reached the church where Father Julián de Avila was to say Mass, it was filled with people. The church was dedicated to the Holy Spirit, which we had not known, and thus they were celebrating an important feast in which a sermon was to be preached.
13. When I saw this I was very sorry. It seemed to me better to go without hearing Mass than to enter such turmoil. It didn't seem so to Father Julián de Avila. And since he was a theologian, we all had to follow his opinion. My other companions perhaps would have followed mine, and it would have been ill-advised, although I don't know if I would have trusted only in my opinion. We got out near the church, and although no one was able to see our faces, since we always wore large veils in front of them, it was enough for the people to see us with the veils, the white coarse woolen mantles we wore, and our sandals of hemp for them to get all stirred up; and that's what happened. The shock was certainly a great one for me and for all, and it must have taken away my fever completely.
14. As we entered the church, a friendly man approached me so as to hold off the people. I pleaded with him to bring us to some chapel. He did so and closed it and did not leave us until we left the church. After a few days, he came to Seville and told a Father of our order that he thought God had rewarded him for the good deed he had performed, for the Lord had provided him with, or given him, a large estate about which he had forgotten.
I tell you, daughters, although it may perhaps seem to you to be nothing, this incident was for me one of the really bad moments I went through. From the uproar of the people you would think that a herd of bulls had come into the church. Thus, I couldn't wait to get out of that place. Since there was nowhere nearby to take siesta, we took it under a bridge.
15. When we reached Seville and the house that Father Fray Mariano had rented for us, which he had been told about, I figured that everything was done. As I say, the archbishop favored the discalced and had at times written to me manifesting much love. That wasn't enough to keep him from causing me much trouble, for God so desired it. The archbishop is very much opposed to monasteries of nuns founded in poverty, and he is right. The trouble was that he hadn't been told; or rather, that was to the advantage of this foundation, for had he been told I am certain he would not have agreed to it. Since Father Commissary and Father Mariano (for whom also my arrival had been the source of the greatest happiness) were most certain that by my coming I would be doing the archbishop an enormous favor, they did not tell him beforehand. And, as I say, while thinking they were right, they could have been making a great mistake. With the other monasteries, the first thing I did was to obtain the license from the ordinary of the place as the holy Council requires. In this case, not only did we consider the license as given, but also, as I say, we thought the monastery would be a great favor to him, as it truly was, and this he came to understand afterward. But the Lord desired that no foundation be made without some trial in one way or another.
16. Well, when we arrived at the house which, as I say, they had rented for us, I thought we could immediately take possession, as was my custom, so that we could say the Divine Office. But Father Mariano began to procrastinate -- he was the one who was there -- and so as not to cause me any grief, he did not want to tell me everything. Since he didn't have sufficient reasons, I understood where the difficulty lay, which was that the license had not been granted. The archbishop told me that it would be good if the monastery were founded with an income, or something like that, for I don't remember. Finally, he told me that he didn't like to grant permission for monasteries of nuns, and that since he had been archbishop he had never done so for any. He had been there many years, as well as in Córdoba, and he is a great servant of God. Especially, he didn't like giving a license for a monastery to be founded in poverty and said that he would not do so.
17. This amounted to saying that the monastery must not be founded. First, it would have seemed to me wrong to found in the city of Seville a monastery with an established income even though I could have done so. The places where I did agree to make foundations with an income were small and required that either I found the monastery with an income or not at all since without one there would be no means of sustenance. Secondly, not a cent was left from the expenses of the journey, and we hadn't brought anything with us except what we were wearing and some tunics and toques, and what was necessary in order to cover the wagons and travel comfortably in them. In order that those who came with us could return, they had to look for a way of borrowing. One of Antonio Gaytán's friends who was there lent them what they needed. And Father Mariano looked for what was necessary to furnish the house; nor did we have a house of our own. Thus, it was an impossible situation.
18. Through what must have been persistent pleading on the part of the said Father we were allowed to have Mass, which was the first, on the feast of the most Blessed Trinity. But word was sent that the bell should not be rung; neither was it to be put up, although it had already been put up. We were in this situation more than fifteen days. I know that if it had not been for Father Commissary and Father Mariano, I would definitely have returned with my nuns, and with very little regret, to Beas for the foundation in Caravaca. Much greater was the regret I actually experienced those days; since I have a bad memory, I do not remember, but I believe this lasted more than a month. For it was more difficult to return now after the monastery was known than it would have been immediately after our arrival. Father Mariano never allowed me to write to the archbishop, but instead went about gradually trying himself to convince him, making use also of letters from Father Commissary who was in Madrid.
19. As for me, one thing was calming and prevented me from feeling great scruple; it was that Mass had been said with the archbishop's permission, and we always said the Divine Office in choir. The archbishop did not fail to send a visitor with the message that he would see me soon, and an assistant was sent to say the first Mass. Hence I saw clearly that there was no point in my being disturbed. Yet, I felt distressed, not because of me or my nuns, but because of the anxiety Father Commissary experienced. Since he had ordered me to come, he felt very bad and would have been pained were something unfortunate to have happened, and he had many reasons for worrying about that.
20. At this time the calced Fathers came in order to inquire concerning the authority by which the foundation had been made. I showed them the patents I had from our most Reverend Father General. With this they were calmed. But if they had known what the archbishop was doing, I don't think the documents I showed them would have sufficed. However, this was not known, and everyone thought the foundation pleased the archbishop very much and made him happy. Finally, God was pleased that he come to see us. I told him about the harm he was doing us. In the end, he told me that the monastery could remain and in the way I wanted it. From then on, he always favored and supported us in everything that occurred.

CHAPTER 25
 
Continues telling about the foundation named after the glorious St. Joseph in Seville and about what we suffered in order to get our own house.
 
1. No one would have thought that in a city as wealthy as Seville and with so many rich people there would be fewer opportunities for a foundation than in any of the other places I had gone to. There was so much less help that I sometimes thought that it would not be good for us to have a monastery in that place. I don't know if the climate itself of that territory is the reason. I have always heard it said that the devils have greater leeway there to tempt souls, for God must grant it to them. They certainly afflicted me there, for I never felt more pusillanimous or cowardly in my life. Indeed, I didn't recognize myself, although the confidence I usually have in our Lord did not leave me. But in my human nature I felt very different from the way I usually do after taking part in these things. I figured that the Lord partly withdrew His hand so that my human nature might be left to itself and I might see that my courage did not come from me.
2. Well then, I stayed there from this time of which I am speaking until a little after Lent. There was not a chance of buying a house, nothing either with which to buy one, nor even anyone who would lend to us as there were in other places. Those women who had often told Father Apostolic Visitator that they would enter our community and had asked him to bring nuns there, afterward thought we were too strict and that they would not be able to endure the life. Only one person, about whom I shall speak later, entered. The time, then, came in which I received orders to leave Andalusia because there were other business matters for me to attend to up here. It distressed me deeply to have to leave the nuns without a house, although I saw clearly that I wasn't accomplishing anything there. For the favor God grants me up here of having people to help me in these works, I did not have there.
3. God was pleased at that time that my brother, Lorenzo de Cepeda, return from the Indies where he had been for more than thirty-four years. Feeling worse than I that the nuns would be staying there without having their own house, he helped us a great deal, especially in procuring the house in which they now live. For my part, I pleaded with our Lord, begging Him that I not have to go away and leave the nuns without a house. I had the Sisters ask Him as well as the glorious St. Joseph for this favor and we offered many processions and prayers to our Lady. Along with this, seeing my brother determined to help us, I began discussing the purchase of some houses. Just when it seemed that everything was starting to work out, it all came to naught.
4. One day, while I was in prayer beseeching our Lord to give them a house since they were His brides and had such desire to please Him, He told me: "I have already heard you; leave it to Me." I was left feeling very happy since it seemed I already had the house. And this was so. His Majesty prevented us from buying one that because of its nice location was pleasing to all. But the house itself was so old and run down that only the site was being bought and for not much less than was paid for the house we have now. Though all was agreed upon and only the contract remained to be drawn up, I was by no means satisfied. This didn't seem to be in accord with the words I had heard in prayer; for those words, I believed, were a sign that a good house would be given to us. And thus the Lord was pleased that the owner, even though he was making a great profit, should raise a difficulty about signing the contract at the established time, and we were able, without any fault, to get out of the agreement. This was a great favor from our Lord, for there was so much work to be done on the house that the Sisters living there would never in all their lives have been able to do it; and their means were few.
5. Much help was given to us by a servant of God who, from almost as soon as we arrived, began to come each day to say Mass, since he knew that we did not have a celebrant, even though his house was far away and the weather was extremely hot. His name is Garciálvarez. Highly esteemed in the city on account of his good works, he is never occupied with anything but them. And had he been wealthy, we would not have lacked anything. Knowing all about the house, he thought it would be very foolish to give so much for it. Thus, each day he told us so and managed to get us to speak of it no more. He and my brother went to see the house in which the nuns now live. They got to like it so much, and rightly so -- and our Lord wanted this -- that in two or three days the contract was signed.
6. What we had to go through before moving in was no trifle. The occupant did not want to leave, and the Franciscan friars, since they were nearby, came at once trying to persuade us that we should by no means move in. If the contract had not been so firmly signed, I would have praised God that it could be broken, because we found ourselves in danger of paying six thousand ducats for a house we were unable to move into. This was not how the prioress viewed the matter. She praised God that the contract could not be broken, for in regard to that house, His Majesty gave her more faith in Him and courage than He did me; just as in everything else, for she is much better than I.
7. This trouble lasted more than a month. God was finally pleased that we move, the prioress with myself and two other nuns, in great fear, at night so that the friars would not be aware until we took possession. Those who came with us said that every shadow they saw seemed to be a friar. When morning came, the good Garciálvarez, who was with us, said the first Mass, and then our fears left us.
8. O Jesus! How many fears I have suffered before taking possession of these foundations! I reflect on the fact that if one can feel so much fear in doing something good, for the service of God, what must be the fear of those who do evil deeds that are against God and against neighbor? I don't know what they can gain or what satisfaction they can find as a counterbalance to all that fear.
9. My brother was not there yet since he had sought sanctuary on account of a certain error made in the contract which was drawn up so hastily. The error was very harmful to the monastery, and since he was the guarantor of the loan they wanted to arrest him. And because he was an outsider, there was the possibility that they would harass us, and in fact they did, for until he put up collateral there was trouble. Afterward the negotiations went well, although there was some contention at times so that we might suffer greater trial. We were enclosed in some rooms on the ground floor, and he was there all day with the workers, and he provided us with food as he had been doing before. Since we were in what had been a private home, not everyone knew it was a monastery, and thus there were few alms save for those of the saintly old prior of Las Cuevas, a Carthusian monk and very great servant of God from the Pantoja family in Avila. God gave him so much love for us that from the time we arrived he did not cease helping in every way, and I think he will continue doing so until he dies. We owe a great deal to this saint. I put this down here, daughters, so that if you read it you will pray for the one who helped us so much, and it is right that you pray for him and for all those, living or dead, who have helped us.
10. My brother stayed with us more than a month, I think. (On this subject of time, I have a poor memory and so I could be mistaken; always understand me to be saying "more or less" since it doesn't matter.) During this month he worked a great deal in constructing the church out of some rooms in the house and adapting everything so that we didn't have to do anything.
11. After all the work was finished, I wanted to have the Blessed Sacrament reserved without any noisy display, for I am much opposed to causing any bother if it can be avoided, and so I mentioned this to Father Garciálvarez. He spoke about it with the Father Prior of Las Cuevas, for they were looking after our affairs as they would their own. Their opinion was that in order to make the monastery known in Seville the Blessed Sacrament would have to be reserved with solemnity, and they went to the archbishop. All agreed that the Blessed Sacrament should be brought with much solemnity from a parish, and the archbishop ordered that the clerics and confraternities gather for the occasion and that the streets be decorated.
12. The good Garciálvarez decorated our cloister which then, as I mentioned, looked on to the street. And in decorating the church he went to every extreme with many very nice altars and some other contrivances. Among these latter was a fount having orange-flower water which we neither requested nor even wanted; although afterward it did give us much devotion. And we were consoled to see that our festival was celebrated with such solemnity, with the streets highly decorated, and a great deal of music and many musical instruments. The saintly prior of Las Cuevas told me that he had never seen anything like this before in Seville, that it was evidently the work of God. He himself walked in the procession, which he was not accustomed to doing. The archbishop reserved the Blessed Sacrament.
Here you see, daughters, the poor discalced nuns honored by all. A little earlier it didn't seem that there would even be any water for them, although there is a great deal in the river. The number of people that came was extraordinary.
13. One thing that happened, according to all who saw it, is worth noting. Since after the procession there was much shooting of artillery and firecrackers, the people had the urge to continue, for it was almost night. And I don't know how, but some powder caught fire, and it was a great wonder that the person who had it didn't get killed. A huge flame leaped up as high as the cloister. The people thought that the taffeta hangings covering the arches would all be reduced to ashes. But no damage was done to them at all, though they were yellow and bright red. What was frightening is that the stone of the arches, under the hangings, was blackened by the smoke, but the taffeta hangings were left unmarred as if the fire had not reached them.
14. All were amazed when they saw it. The nuns praised the Lord that they didn't have to pay for new taffeta. The devil must have been so angry at seeing another house of God and the solemnity that was demonstrated that he wanted somehow to get revenge. But His Majesty did not allow this; may He be blessed forever, amen.

CHAPTER 26
 
Continues the account of the foundation of the monastery of St. Joseph in the city of Seville. Tells some very noteworthy things about the first nun who entered there.
 
1. You can easily understand, my daughters, the consolation we had that day. For my part, I can tell you that it was very great. I was especially consoled to see that I was leaving the Sisters in a house that was so good and well located, and that the monastery was known, and that there were enough new nuns to pay for the greater part of the cost of the house. Thus, those who in the future, before the established number is reached, may want to enter can do so no matter how little the dowry they bring with them, and the debt can still be paid off. Above all, I was happy for having shared in the trials, and when there was opportunity for a little rest, I left. This festival took place the Sunday before Pentecost in the year 1576, and immediately on Monday, the following day, I departed, for the extremely hot weather was beginning to come and I wanted to be in Malagón before Pentecost and not have to travel on that day. I would have liked to have delayed a day or so, but for the above reason I left in a hurry.
2. The Lord was not pleased that I be there even one day to hear Mass in the chapel. The nuns' happiness was greatly spoiled by my departure. They felt it very keenly, for we had gone through so many trials together in that year. As I have said, I am not recording the worst ones here. In my opinion, aside from the first foundation in Avila (for with that one there is no comparison), none of the other foundations cost me as much as this one did in which the trials were for the most part interior ones. May it please the Divine Majesty that He always be served there, as I hope He will be, for then everything else is of little importance. His Majesty began to draw good souls to that house. As for the five who remained out of the six I brought with me, I have already told you how good they were; that is, something of what can be told, which is the least. I wish to speak now of the first nun who entered there since her story is something you will enjoy hearing about.
3. She was the young daughter of very Christian parents. Her father was from the mountain region. She was still young, around seven, when her aunt, who had no children, begged her mother to allow her to stay with her. When she was brought to the house, her aunt must have shown her much love and affection as was natural. The maids had been hoping they would get the aunt's inheritance, but now it was clear that since the aunt loved the child she would leave it to her. The maids decided together to remove that obstacle through a diabolical plot, inventing a calumny against the child, saying that she wanted to kill her aunt. And in order to carry this out they gave one from among them I don't know how much money to buy some corrosive sublimate. When they told the aunt, she believed them at once because they all said the same thing. And the child's mother did too, for she is a very virtuous woman.
4. She took the child and brought her home thinking that she might turn out to be a very bad woman. Beatriz de la Madre de Dios, for that is her name, tells me that for more than a year they spanked, punished, and made her sleep on the floor so that she would confess that she had planned to do something so evil. Since the girl denied that she had done it and said that she didn't know what corrosive sublimate was, her mother thought she was much worse since she was stubborn enough to deny it. The poor mother was so afflicted to see her daughter so headstrong in her refusal to admit she had done anything that she thought her daughter would never make amends. It's amazing that the girl didn't admit she was guilty just to free herself from so much punishment. But since she was innocent, God sustained her so that she continued to uphold the truth. And since His Majesty defends those who are without fault, He sent two of those maids an illness so bad that it seemed they had caught the rabies. Secretly they sent for both the little girl and her aunt and begged pardon from them, and finding themselves at the point of death they retracted. The other maid did likewise before dying in childbirth. In sum, all three of them died agonizing deaths in payment for what they had made that innocent girl suffer.
5. I did not learn this solely from her, for her mother, after she saw that her daughter had become a nun, grieved over the bad treatment they had given her, and told me about it along with other things, for the girl's martyrdoms were many. And God permitted that, without it being her fault, the mother, who was a good Christian and loved her daughter, become her daughter's executioner. This mother is a woman of great honesty and deep Christian spirit.
6. While reading a book on the life of St. Anne, the child, when a little more than twelve years old, became very devoted to the saints of Carmel. For the author of the book says that St. Anne's mother -- I believe her name is Merenciana -- often went to speak to those saints. The effect this reading had on the girl was one of great devotion to the order of our Lady, for she then promised to become a nun in that order and also made a promise of chastity. When she could, she gave much time to solitude and prayer. In this solitude God and our Lady granted her many great and special favors. She would have liked to become a nun at once but she didn't dare because of her parents. Nor did she know where to find this order; which is surprising, for there was a monastery of the mitigated rule in Seville. But she had never heard of it until she heard of our monasteries many years later.
7. When she reached the marriageable age, though she was still but a girl, her parents came to an agreement on whom she should marry. She was their only child. Although she had had other brothers, they had all died, and she, the less loved by her parents, was left. (When what I mentioned happened one of her brothers was alive, and he defended her saying that the calumny should not be believed. ) Once the marriage was arranged, her parents didn't think she would have any objection, but when they told her she answered that she had made a vow not to get married and that no scheme whatever on their part, even if they were to kill her, would get her to do so.
8. Because either the devil blinded the parents or God permitted this so that she would be a martyr, they thought she had done something wicked and that for that reason she did not want to get married. Since they had already given their word and their not following through on it would have been taken as an affront by the other party, they gave her so many whippings, inflicted on her so many punishments, even to the point of wanting to hang her, for they were choking her, that it was fortunate they didn't kill her. God who desired her for greater things saved her. She tells me that in the end she hardly felt anything because she recalled what St. Agnes had suffered, that the Lord had brought it to her mind, that she was pleased to suffer something for Him, and that she did nothing but offer herself to Him. They thought she would die, for she was in bed three months, unable to stir.
9. It seems very strange that the parents of this young maiden, a girl who never left her mother's side and whose father was very circumspect, should think so much evil of their daughter. She was always holy and virtuous, and very dedicated to almsgiving; all that she could obtain she gave away in alms. If our Lord wishes to grant someone the favor of suffering, He has many means; although, for some years our Lord had been revealing to her parents the virtue of their daughter so that they gave her all she wanted for distributing alms, and the former persecutions were changed into tokens of affection. Nonetheless, because of her longing to be a nun everything was a hardship for her; thus, according to what she told me, she went about dejected and troubled.
10. It happened that thirteen or fourteen years before Father Gracián went to Seville (when nobody had even heard of discalced Carmelites), while she was with her father and mother and two other women who were neighbors, a discalced friar of our order dressed in the coarse wool habits these friars now wear entered their house. They say his face was both fresh and venerable, although he was so old that his beard seemed made of silver threads, and it was long. He approached her and began to speak to her a little in a language that neither she nor anyone else understood. When he finished, he blessed her three times saying: "Beatriz, may God make you strong." And then he went away. No one stirred while he was there, but all remained as though stupefied. Her father asked her who he was. She had thought that her father had known him. They got up at once to go and look for him, but he was seen no more. She remained very consoled, and all the others very amazed, for they considered this to be something from God, and so they then began to esteem her highly as was said. After this, all those years passed, I believe they were fourteen, while she was ever serving our Lord, beseeching Him to fulfill her desire.
11. She was very weary by the time Father Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián arrived there. Going one day to hear a sermon in a church in Triana, which is where her father was living, without knowing who the preacher would be -- it was the Father Maestro Gracián -- she saw him go up to receive the blessing. When she saw the habit and that he was discalced, she at once recalled the one who she had seen, for the habit was the same; although the face and the age were different, for Father Gracián was not yet thirty years old. She tells me that her joy was so great she almost fainted, for although she had heard that a monastery was founded there in Triana she had not known to which order it belonged. Immediately, from that day she began to try to confess to Father Gracián. Yet God desired that even that would cost her much, for she tried more than, or at least as many as, twelve times, but the Father never wanted to hear her confession. Since she was young and attractive in appearance -- for she must have been no more than twenty-seven -- he avoided conversation with her; he is very circumspect.
12. Finally, one day while she was in the church weeping (being also very reserved), a lady asked her what the trouble was. She told her that she had been trying for a long time to speak with that Father who was then in the confessional and that she had not succeeded. The lady brought her to the confessional and begged him to hear the young girl's confession, and thus this girl was able to make a general confession to him. When he saw what a virtuous soul she was, he was greatly consoled, and he consoled her, telling her that perhaps discalced nuns would come there and that he would arrange that they accept her immediately. And that is what happened. The first command he gave me was that she be the first to be admitted, for he was satisfied with her soul. And he informed her of this after we had arrived there. He insisted that she not let her parents know because otherwise there would be no possibility of her entering. And thus on the feastday of the Holy Trinity she took leave from some women who accompanied her to the church. (Her mother did not go with her when she went to the monastery of the discalced friars for confession, which is where she always went, for it was far away. And she, and her parents through her, gave many alms to the monastery.) She had arranged with a woman who was a very good servant of God to bring her and told the women who were accompanying her that she would soon return. And they allowed her to go since the woman companion was very well known in Seville as a servant of God who did great works of mercy. She put on her habit and mantle of coarse wool; I don't know how she was able to move, except that the happiness she felt made everything seem easy. Her only fear was that someone might recognize her behind this heavy habit, so different from her usual mode of dress, and stop her. What wonders the love of God works! Since she was no longer concerned about her honor and thought of nothing but how to realize her desire, we opened the door at once. I sent word of this to her mother. Her mother came to the monastery as though out of her mind; but she said that she already saw the favor God was granting her daughter. And although she was grieved, she overcame it courageously and did not go to the extreme of not speaking to her daughter as others do. She gave us many alms.
13. This bride of Christ began to enjoy the happiness she had so much longed for and was so humble and fond of doing all there was to do that we could hardly get the broom away from her. Whereas in her own home she had been so pampered, here she found all her rest in working. In her great happiness she began to put on weight. This pleased her relatives so much that they were now content to see her there.
14. In order that she would not enjoy so much good without suffering, she experienced very severe temptations two or three months before the time in which she was to make her profession; not because she had decided against making it, but because it seemed to her a very serious step to take. The devil, making her forget all those years in which she had suffered to attain this blessing, was so tormenting her that she could not overcome the temptation. Nevertheless, by absolutely forcing herself, she defeated him in such a way that in the midst of these torments she made the plans for her profession. Our Lord, who must not have been waiting for anything more than the testing of her fortitude, visited and consoled her in a very special way three days before the profession and put the devil to flight. She remained so consoled that during those three days it seemed as though she was outside herself with happiness; and rightly so because the favor had been great.
15. A few days after she entered the monastery, her father died. Her mother took the habit in the same monastery and gave all she possessed in alms. Both mother and daughter experience the greatest happiness, edifying all the nuns and serving Him who granted them so wonderful a favor.
16. A year had not passed before another young lady, against the will of her parents, entered. And thus the Lord continues to fill this house of His with souls so desirous of serving Him, for neither austerity nor enclosure deters them. May He be blessed and praised forever and ever, amen.

CHAPTER 27
 
Treats of the foundation made in the town of Caravaca. The Blessed Sacrament was reserved on New Year's Day, 1576. The monastery is under the patronage of the glorious St. Joseph.
 
1. While I was at St. Joseph's in Avila about to leave for the foundation in Beas that was mentioned -- for the only thing we had still to prepare was the means of transportation -- a private messenger arrived from a lady in Caravaca named Doña Catalina. After hearing a sermon preached by a Father from the Society of Jesus, three young ladies went to her house determined not to leave until a monastery was founded in that town. This action must have been something they had already discussed with this lady who is the one who helped them make the foundation. They belonged to the most important families of that town. The father of one of them was Rodrigo Moya, a very great servant of God and a man of much prudence. Among the three of them they had enough resources to seek to accomplish a project like this. They learned from the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, who have always favored and helped this work, of what our Lord has done in founding these monasteries.
2. Since I saw the desire and fervor of those souls and that they went so far looking for the order of our Lady, I was moved with devotion and there arose in me the desire to help them carry out their good intention. Learning that Caravaca was close to Beas, I took with me a greater number of nuns than I usually do. My intention was to go there after completing the foundation in Beas. According to the letters these ladies sent, it seemed to me we could come to an agreement. But since the Lord had disposed otherwise, my plans were of little help, as was said when speaking of the foundation in Seville. For they had obtained the license from the council of the Order of Knights in such a way that even though I had made up my mind to go, I had to give up the idea.
3. The truth of the matter is that when I learned in Beas where Caravaca is and saw that it was so out of the way and the road for those who would have to visit the nuns was so bad and that the superiors would be displeased, I had little enthusiasm for making the foundation. But since I had raised the hopes of those ladies, I asked Father Julián de Avila and Antonio Gaytán to go there to see what the place was like and, if they so decided, to cancel the plans. They felt lukewarm toward the project not because of the three who wanted to be nuns but because Doña Catalina who was mainly responsible for the foundation, for she kept these ladies in a separate room by themselves as though they were already enclosed.
4. These nuns, or better, these who were about to become nuns, especially two of them, were so convinced of their vocation that they knew how to gain the goodwill of Father Julián de Avila and Antonio Gaytán. Before returning, these latter two signed the documents of agreement and returned leaving the young ladies very happy. They came back so enthused about these women and the place that they never stopped talking about it, nor did they stop talking about the bad road. Since I saw that the agreement had been reached but that the license was delayed in coming, I sent the good Antonio Gaytán there again who for love of me underwent all the hardship willingly. He and Father Julián de Avila were eager that the foundation be made. The truth of the matter is that they are the ones who should be thanked for this foundation. If they hadn't gone there and reached an agreement, I would not have bothered about it.
5. I sent Antonio Gaytán to put up the turn and the grille in the house where the nuns were going to live until finding another suitable one. This was the house of Rodrigo de Moya, who, as I mentioned, was the father of one of these ladies, and very willingly allowed them to use a part of his house. Antonio Gaytán remained there doing this work for many days.
6. When they brought the license and I was about ready to depart for Caravaca, I learned from the license that the house would have to be subject to the council of the Order of Knights and obedience given to them, which is something I could not do because we belonged to the Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel.
And thus, another license was asked for that would not have this condition, for otherwise neither there nor in Beas would a foundation be possible. When I wrote to the king, who at present is Don Philip, he granted me the great favor of issuing orders that the license be granted. The king is so fond of favoring religious who he knows are faithful to their profession that once he had learned of the manner of life in these monasteries and that we follow the primitive rule, he favored us in everything. And thus, daughters, I beg you that special prayer be always offered for his majesty, as is done by us now.
7. Since they had to petition again for the license, I departed for Seville by order of Father Provincial, who was then, and still is, Father Fray Jerónimo Gracián de la Madre de Dios , as was said. And the poor young ladies were enclosed there until the following New Year's Day. It had been around February when they had sent me a messenger in Avila. The license, then, was obtained in a short time, without delay. But since I was so far away and involved in so many troubles, I was not able to help them. And I felt most sorry for them, for they wrote to me frequently very distressed, and so I could not bear making them wait any longer.
8. Since it was impossible for me to go because I was so far away and the foundation in Seville was not completed, Father Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián, who was the apostolic visitator, as was mentioned, ordered those nuns to go, even though I could not go with them, who had been chosen for the foundation and who were waiting at St. Joseph's in Malagón. I arranged for someone to be prioress who I trusted would fulfill the office very well, for she is far better than I And taking with them all the provisions, they left with two discalced Fathers of our order. Father Julián de Avila and Antonio Gaytán had already returned home some time before, so I did not want them to accompany the Sisters because they were too far away and the weather was so bad, for it was the end of December.
9. When the nuns arrived in the town, they were received with great joy by the people and especially by those women who had been living an enclosed life. They founded the monastery, reserving the Blessed Sacrament, on the feast of the Holy Name of Jesus, in the year 1576. Two of the women immediately took the habit. The other one suffered very much from melancholy. It must have been bad for her to live an enclosed life, and how much more so when it was so strict and penitential. She decided to return home to live with one of her sisters.
10. Reflect, my daughters, on the judgments of God and on our obligation to serve Him who has allowed us to persevere until making profession and to live always in the house of God and be daughters of the Virgin. For His Majesty benefited by the good will of this young lady and by her property so that the monastery could be founded, and when the time came for her to be able to enjoy what she had so desired, she was lacking in fortitude and became subject to the melancholic humor. This latter, daughters, we often blame for our imperfections and inconstancy.
11. May it please His Majesty to give us abundant grace, for with this, nothing will prevent us from advancing ever in His service. And may He protect and favor all of us so that this excellent beginning, which He was pleased to initiate in women as miserable as we, may not be lost through our weakness. In His name I beg you, my daughters and Sisters, that you always ask our Lord for this and that each one who enters in the future bear in mind that with her the observance of the primitive rule of the order of the Virgin, our Lady, begins again and that she must in no way consent to any mitigation. Consider that through very little things the door is opened to very big things, and that without your realizing it the world will start entering your lives. Remember the poverty and hardship that was undergone in obtaining what you now quietly enjoy. If you note carefully, you will see that in part these houses, most of them, have not been founded by men but by the powerful hand of God and that His Majesty is very fond of advancing the works He accomplishes provided we cooperate. From where do you think a useless woman like me, subject to obedience, without even a maravedi, with no one to help me in any way, could get the power for such great works? For this brother of mine, who helped with the foundation in Seville and had the means, courage, and goodness of soul to help, was in the Indies.
12. See, my daughters, see the hand of God. Well, it could not be because I am from the nobility that He has given me such honor. In whatever way you want to look at this you will recognize that it is His work. It would not be right for us to undermine it in any way. We must not do so even if it cost us our life, honor, and tranquility. Moreover, we have everything here, for to have life is to live in such a way that there is no fear of death or of any of life's happenings, to have an habitual happiness, as you now all have, and to enjoy this prosperity that cannot be surpassed when there is no fear of poverty, but on the contrary desire for it. Well, to what can the interior and exterior peace that you always enjoy be compared? It is in your power to live and to die with this peace, as you have witnessed in those you have seen die in these houses. For if you always ask God to foster this way of life and you trust not at all in yourselves, He will not deny you His mercy. And if you have confidence in Him and have courageous spirits -- for His Majesty is very fond of these -- you need not fear that He will fail you in anything. Never refuse to accept because they are not wealthy those who ask to become nuns provided they are virtuous and you are pleased with their desires and talents, and they do not come merely as a remedy for their social situation but come to serve God with greater perfection. God in other ways will provide doubly for that which you might lack because of doing this.
13. I have much experience of this. His Majesty knows well that insofar as I can remember I have never refused to accept anyone because of lack of money, provided I was satisfied with all the rest. The witnesses of this are the many who have been received only for God, as you know. And I can certify that when I received those who brought much wealth I did not feel as great a joy as I did with those I accepted only for God. On the contrary, I had fear about those with wealth, but the poor filled and enlarged my spirit with a happiness so great I wept for joy. This is the truth.
14. Well, if when we had to buy and build houses we got along so well following this procedure, why shouldn't we do so now that we have a place to live? Believe me, daughters, the means by which you think you are accumulating are those by which you will be losing. When the person about to enter has wealth, without any other obligation, it is good that she give it to you as alms instead of giving it to others who have no need of it. For I confess that it would seem to me a lack of love if she didn't do this. But always bear in mind that the one who is about to enter should dispose of her possessions in conformity with what learned men advise her is for the greater service of God. It would be very bad if we were to look for any other good from those who enter this service. We gain much more when she does what she ought for God -- I mean with greater perfection -- than from all that she brings with her, for none of us is aiming after anything else. Nor may God allow this to happen, but only that His Majesty be served in all and through all.
15. And although I am wretched and miserable, I say this for the honor and glory of God and so that you may rejoice in how these houses of His were founded. Never in any business related to these foundations, nor in anything that happened relative to them, did I do anything or would I have done anything -- I mean with regard to these foundations -- that I understood to go contrary to the will of God in even one point, and this, too, when I thought that in order to succeed I would have to cover up my intentions. I proceeded according to what my confessors advised me, for since I have been working on these foundations, my confessors have always been very learned men and great servants of God, as you know. Nor, insofar as I remember, did anything else pass through my mind than to proceed in this way.
16. Perhaps I am mistaken and have done many things wrong without realizing it; and the imperfections are countless. Our Lord who is the true judge knows that my intentions were good, insofar as I could discern concerning myself, I mean. Also, I see clearly that this good did not come from me but from God who willed that this work be done, and because it was His work He favored me and granted this gift. The reason why I'm telling you this, my daughters, is that you may understand how obliged you are and know that so far nothing offensive has been done to anyone. May He who has done everything be blessed and may charity be awakened in the persons who have helped us. May it please His Majesty to protect us always and give us His grace so that we will not be ungrateful for so many favors, amen.
17. You have seen, daughters, that we have undergone some trials, although I believe I have written about the least part of them. For it would be tiresome if I had to describe in detail the roads, the rain and snow, and getting lost and, above all, frequently, my very poor health. With regard to this latter it happened to me -- I don't know if I mentioned it -- that on the first day of our journey from Malagón to Beas I was traveling with a fever and so many illnesses all together that while considering the distance we still had to travel and seeing myself in this condition I remembered our Father Elijah when he was fleeing from Jezebel, and said, "Lord, how can I suffer this? You take care." The truth is that when His Majesty saw me so weak, He suddenly took away my fever and illness. This so happened that afterward when I thought about it I figured that perhaps it was because a priest, a servant of God, was going to enter the order there; at least the exterior and interior illnesses were suddenly taken away. When I had good health, I underwent the bodily hardships with joy.
18. Well, putting up with the many different personalities one necessarily finds in every town caused no small amount of trouble. And to leave my daughters and Sisters when going from one place to another, was not the smallest cross, I tell you, since I love them so much; especially when I thought I was not going to return to see them again and I saw their great sadness and tears. Even though they are detached from other things, God has not given them the gift to be detached from me, perhaps so that it might be a greater torment to me, for I am not detached from them either, even though I forced myself as much as I could so as not to show it and I reprimanded them. But this was of little help since their love for me is great, and in many ways it is obvious that this love is true.
19. You have heard how it was not just with the permission of our Most Reverend Father General that these foundations were made but that I was ordered under obedience by him afterward to do so. And not only this, but he used to write to me about the great joy each new house that was founded gave him. Assuredly, the greatest relief I experienced in the midst of the trials was to see the happiness this work gave to him, for it seemed to me that by giving him this happiness I was serving our Lord since he is my major superior, and besides this I love him much.
20. That which came about next did so either because His Majesty desired to give me some rest or because the devil was displeased that so many houses were being founded where our Lord was being served. (It was easy to understand that what came about was not the will of our Father General because he had written me not many years before in answer to my request not to found any more houses that he would not stop ordering me to do so because he wanted me to make as many foundations as I had hairs on my head.) Before I came back from Seville, a general chapter was held. In a general chapter one would think they would be concerned about the expansion of the order, but instead the definitory gave me a command not merely to make no more foundations but not to leave the house in which I chose to reside, which would be a kind of prison, for there is no nun who for necessary matters pertaining to the good of the order cannot be ordered by the provincial to go from one place to another, I mean from one monastery to another. And what was worse and what made me sad was that our Father General was displeased with me, without any reason at all, because of information given by biased persons.
Along with this I was told of two other serious calumnies that were raised against me. I tell you, Sisters, so that you will see the mercy of our Lord and how His Majesty does not abandon the one who desires to serve Him. For these calumnies not only failed to make me sad but gave me so great an accidental joy that I could not restrain myself. As a result, I'm not surprised at what David did when he went before the ark of the Lord, for because of my joy which I didn't know how to conceal I wanted to do nothing else at the time. I don't know the reason, for this has never happened to me in all the other great criticism and opposition I have received. Moreover, one of these two calumnies spoken against me was most serious. But the command not to make foundations -- aside from the displeasure of our Most Reverend Father General -- brought me great tranquility and was what I was often desiring: to end my days in quiet. But this was not what those who devised this were intending. They wanted to inflict on me the greatest sorrow in the world, and perhaps they may have had other good intentions.
21. On occasion, also, the strong opposition and criticism (sometimes offered with good intentions and at other times for other purposes) that I received in making these foundations gave me great joy. But I don't ever remember, no matter how much the hardship, experiencing happiness as great as I did in this instance. For I confess that at other times any one of these three things that came all together would have been a severe trial for me. I believe that my main joy came from my thinking that since creatures repaid me like this I was pleasing the Creator. For I am convinced that he who looks for joy in earthly things or in words of praise from men is very much mistaken, without mentioning the little advantage there is in them. Today people will think one thing, tomorrow another; at one time they will speak well of something; soon they will speak badly of it. May You be blessed, my Lord and my God, for You are unchangeable forever and ever, amen. The one who serves unto the end will live without end in Your eternity.
22. I began to write about these foundations by order of Father Maestro Ripalda of the Society of Jesus, as I said at the beginning, for he was then the rector of the College in Salamanca and my confessor. While I was in the monastery of St. Joseph in that city in 1573, I wrote about some of these foundations. But because of my many duties I set the work aside. I did not want to continue, for Father Ripalda was no longer my confessor, and we lived in different places, and also because of the great hardship and trials that what I have written cost me; although since I was always ordered to do so under obedience, I consider them well worthwhile. Though I was determined to write no more, the apostolic commissary, who is now Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián de la Madre de Dios, ordered me to finish the account of these foundations. Being wretched in the practice of obedience, I told him of the little opportunity I had and other things that came to my mind and also that the task was very tiring for me on top of all the other things I had to do. Nonetheless, he ordered me to finish them little by little as best I could. This I did submitting in everything to what those who know about these things might want to delete. What is poorly expressed, let them delete, for perhaps what seems to me better will sound bad to them.
I have finished today, the vigil of St. Eugene, the fourteenth day of the month of November in the year 1576 in the monastery of St. Joseph in Toledo. This is where I now reside by order of Father Apostolic Commissary, Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián de la Madre de Dios, who we now have as superior for the discalced friars and nuns of the primitive rule, and who is also visitator for those of the mitigated rule living in Andalusia. May this work contribute to the honor and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ who reigns and will reign forever, amen.
For the love of our Lord, I beg the Sisters and Brothers who might read this to recommend me to our Lord that He might have mercy on me and free me from the pains of purgatory, if I should be there, and let me enjoy Him. Since you will not see this while I am living, may the weariness I experienced in writing it as well as the great desire I had to say something that would be consoling to you, if you are allowed to read it, be of some benefit to me after my death.
