CHAPTER 28
 
The foundation in Villanueva de la Jara.
 
1. The foundation in Seville, made more than four years ago, was the last one. It was the last because of the great persecutions that broke out unexpectedly against the discalced friars and nuns. Although there had been many persecutions before, they were not so extreme. Now the whole undertaking was at the point of collapse. It was clearly seen how much the devil resented this holy beginning, which our Lord had initiated, and also that this was the Lord's own work since it was growing. The discalced friars suffered very much, especially the superiors, from serious false testimony and opposition on the part of almost all the calced Fathers.
2. These Fathers informed our Most Reverend Father General in such a way that even though he was a holy man and had given permission for all the monasteries (with the exception of St. Joseph's in Avila, which was the first, for this was founded with the permission of the pope), he was urged to oppose strongly any new foundations among the discalced friars. Toward the monasteries of the nuns, he was always well disposed. And so that I might not be helping the friars make foundations, he was induced into becoming displeased with me, which was the greatest trial I suffered in the work of these foundations, even though I have suffered many. On the one hand, very learned men who were my confessors would not agree that I should stop and counseled me to help toward the growth of the work, pointing out that I clearly rendered service to our Lord and helped toward the increase of our order; and on the other hand, going against the will of my superior was like a death to me. For apart from the obligation I had toward him because he was my superior, I loved him very tenderly and there were many reasons for obeying him. It is true that even though I wanted to please him by obeying this order, I could not because there were apostolic visitators whom I was obliged to obey.
3. A holy nuncio died who greatly promoted virtue and, as a result, esteemed the discalced. Another nuncio arrived who it seems had been sent by God to test us in suffering. He was a distant relative of the pope, and he must be a servant of God, but he began to take seriously to favoring the calced and in conformity with the information they gave him about us he was convinced that the right thing to do was to put a stop to these foundations. Thus, he began to act with the greatest severity, condemning those he thought could oppose him by imprisoning them or sending them into exile.
4. Those who suffered most were: Father Fray Antonio de Jesús, who was the one who started the first monastery of discalced friars; Fray Jerónimo Gracián, whom the former nuncio made apostolic visitator to the Fathers of the cloth and with whom the new nuncio was greatly displeased; and Father Mariano de San Benito. I have already mentioned who these Fathers are in writing of the preceding foundations. On other friars, among the more outstanding ones, he imposed penances, although not so severe. He issued many censures to prevent them from carrying on any business.
5. It is obvious that all this came from God and that His Majesty permitted it for a greater good and so that the virtue of these Fathers would be better known. The nuncio appointed a superior from the Fathers of the cloth to visit the monasteries of our friars and nuns, which would have been a great hardship for us if what he thought was going on had been a fact. Still, the hardship that was suffered was very great. This will be recorded in writing by someone who knows better how to write about it. I am only touching on the matter so that the nuns that are to come will know how obliged they are to advance in perfection, since from that which has cost so much to those who are now living they will benefit free of trouble. For some of the nuns now living have suffered very much in these times from serious false testimony, which grieved me far more than what I was undergoing, for this latter was rather a great delight for me. It seemed to me that I was the cause of this storm, and that if they would have thrown me into the sea, as they did Jonah, the tempest would have stopped.
6. May God who favors truth be praised! And this is what happened here, for since our Catholic king, Don Philip, knew of what was going on and was informed of the life and religious observance of the discalced, he took the initiative to favor us. Thus, he did not want our cause to be judged by the nuncio alone but gave him four counselors, responsible persons, three of whom were religious, so that our rights would be carefully looked after. One of these was the Father Maestro Fray Pedro Fernández, a person of very holy life, great learning and intelligence. He had been apostolic commissary and visitator of the Fathers of the cloth in the Castile province, and we discalced had also been subject to him. He knew well the truth about how each group lived, for the desire of us all was nothing other than that this be known. And so when I saw that the king had named him, I considered the matter taken care of, as by the mercy of God it is. May it please His Majesty that this all be for His honor and glory.
Although there were many noblemen and bishops who made haste to inform the nuncio of the truth, all this would have benefited little if God had not chosen the king to intervene.
7. We are all very much obliged in our prayers to our Lord, Sisters, to recommend the king and those who have helped this cause. It is the Lord's cause and our Lady's, the Blessed Virgin's, and so I urge you to do this. Well you can imagine, Sisters, what little possibility there was for making any foundations. We were all occupied unceasingly in prayers and penances so that our Lord would preserve the houses already founded if doing so would be for His service.
8. I was in Toledo when these great trials started, which described so briefly will seem small to you but when suffered for so long a time were very great. I had arrived there from the foundation in Seville in 1576. A priest from Villanueva de la Jara brought me letters from the town council there. He came to negotiate with me and ask that I accept as a monastery a shrine in that town dedicated to the glorious St. Anne where nine women were living together. This shrine has a little house nearby where for some years these women were living with so much recollection and holiness that the whole town was moved to seek to help them attain their desires to become nuns. I also received a letter from a doctor, a priest in this town, named Agustín de Ervías, a learned man of great virtue. Because of his virtue he was moved to help this holy work as much as he could.
9. It seemed to me that for the following reasons it would have been completely unsuitable to accept this foundation: First, there were so many women, and it seemed to me it would be very difficult for them to adapt to our way of life when they were used to their own. Second, they had almost nothing to live on, and the population of the place is little more than a thousand which is not much help for living on alms. (Although the town council offered to support them, it didn't seem to me to be a stable offer). Third, they didn't have a house. Fourth, the place was far from where these other monasteries were located. Fifth, although I was told that these women were very good, I had not seen them and so could not verify whether they had the qualities we require for these monasteries. Thus I decided to turn down the proposal entirely.
10. Before doing so, I wanted to speak with my confessor who was Doctor Velázquez, a canon and professor in Toledo, a very learned and virtuous man, who is now Bishop of Osma. For it is always my custom never to do anything on my own but rather to seek the opinion of persons like him. When he saw the letters and understood the matter he told me not to turn the proposal down but to answer in a friendly manner, for when God has joined so many hearts for the sake of something, one may suppose that He will be served by it. This I did, for I neither accepted it entirely nor turned it down. They continued entreating and getting influential persons to intercede with me until this year 1580. My opinion was always that it would be foolish to agree to this request. When I responded I could never give a completely negative answer.
11. It happened that when Father Fray Antonio de Jesús completed his time of exile at the monastery of our Lady of Succor, he went to preach in Villanueva which is three leagues away. And the present prior of this monastery, Father Fray Gabriel de la Asunción, a person of very good judgment and a servant of God, also came often to this town, for he and Father Antonio were friends of Doctor Ervías, and they began to converse with these holy Sisters. Becoming admirers of their virtue and persuaded by the townspeople and the doctor, they took this matter upon themselves as their own and through letters tried very hard to persuade me. And while I was at St. Joseph's in Malagón, which is more than twenty-six leagues from Villanueva, this prior came to speak to me about this foundation, giving me an account of what could be done and how after it was made Doctor Ervías would give three hundred ducats income from what he received from his benefice; that permission would be obtained from Rome.
12. This looked very unsure, since it seemed to me that after the foundation was made they would drag their feet saying that the little the Sisters had was quite enough. And then I put forth many reasons, in my opinion sufficient, to convince Father Prior that it would not be suitable to make a foundation, and I said that he and Father Antonio should consider these carefully; and I left the matter on their conscience, thinking that what I had said sufficed for refusing to make the foundation.
13. After he had gone, I considered how much in favor he was of the foundation and that he would persuade the superior we now have, who is Fray Angel de Salazar, to accept it. I wrote to the latter with haste begging him not to give this permission and telling him the reasons. From what he wrote to me afterward, he would not have wanted to give the permission unless the foundation seemed to me a good thing.
14. A month and a half went by, or perhaps a little more. When I thought I had put a stop to the matter, a messenger came with letters from the town council, which took on the obligation to provide for the needs of the monastery, from Doctor Ervías who obliged himself to what I mentioned, and -- very enthusiastic ones -- from these two Reverend Fathers. I found myself very confused. On the one hand, I had great fear of admitting so many Sisters thinking that as usually happens they would band together against those others who would join them; and on the other hand, I did not see a sure means for their support, because that which was offered amounted to nothing very impressive. Afterward I understood that my confusion was from the devil, for even though the Lord had given me so much courage, I had become fainthearted to the point that it doesn't seem I was trusting God at all. But the prayers of those good souls in the end prevailed.
15. One day after I received Communion I was recommending this matter to God as I often used to do. For what made me answer them somewhat favorably was the fear of hindering spiritual progress in souls, for my desire is always to be some means by which our Lord may be praised and that there be more to serve Him. While I was praying in this way, His Majesty reprimanded me sternly, asking me with what treasures that which had been done so far had been accomplished and telling me that I should not hesitate to accept this house, that it would be for His great service and the spiritual progress of souls.
16. Since these locutions from God are so powerful, not only does the intellect understand them but it is enlightened so as to understand the truth, and the will is disposed to the desire to carry them out; and this is what happened to me. For not only was I glad to accept the foundation but it seemed to me that I had been at fault in delaying so long and being tied to human reason when the works I had seen His Majesty do for this sacred religious order were so beyond reason.
17. Having decided to accept this foundation, it seemed to me necessary, for many reasons that occurred to me, that I go with the nuns who were to live there. My human nature resisted very much, for I had arrived in Malagón very sick and have always been so. But since I thought the foundation would serve our Lord, I wrote to my superior to order me to do what he thought best. He sent the license for the foundation and the command that I go personally and bring the nuns of my choice. This latter worried me a great deal since the nuns would have to live with those women who were already there. Praying to our Lord very much over this matter, I took two from the monastery of St. Joseph's in Toledo, one of them for prioress, and two from Malagón, one of them for subprioress. Since we had prayed so much to His Majesty, things turned out very well, which to me was no small matter; for in the foundations that we began by ourselves alone, the nuns adapt to each other well.
18. Father Fray Antonio de Jesús and Father Fray Gabriel de la Asunción came for us. Given an assurance of help from the town, we left Malagón on the Saturday before Lent, the thirteenth of February in 1580. God was pleased to make the weather so good and give me such health that it seemed to me I had never been sick. I was surprised and reflected on how very important it is not to consider our weak state of health or any opposition that occurs when we understand that something serves the Lord since God is powerful enough to make the weak strong and the sick healthy. And when our Lord does not do this, suffering will be the best thing for our souls; and fixing our eyes on His honor and glory, we should forget ourselves. What is the purpose of life and health save that they be lost for so great a King and Lord? Believe me, Sisters, you will never go astray in following this path.
19. I confess that my wretchedness and weakness have often made me fear and doubt. But I don't remember that from the time the Lord gave me the habit of a discalced nun, and some time before this, He ever failed to grant me the favor, solely out of His mercy, to conquer these temptations and throw myself into what I understood to be for His greater service however difficult it was. I understood clearly that what I did for my part was little, but God wants no more than our determination so that He may do everything Himself. May He be forever blessed and praised, amen.
20. We had to go to the monastery of our Lady of Succor, already mentioned, which is three leagues from Villanueva, and stay there so as to inform the town that we were coming, which had been agreed upon with these Fathers, and it was right that in everything I obey these Fathers with whom we were traveling. This house stood in a delightfully isolated and solitary spot. And as we approached, the friars came out in procession to meet their prior. Since they were discalced and wore their poor, coarse woolen mantles, they inspired us all with devotion and moved me to tender feelings since it seemed to me that I was present in that flourishing time of our holy Fathers of old. In that field, they appeared to be like white fragrant flowers, and indeed I believe that before God they are, for in my opinion He is authentically served there. They entered the church singing the Te Deum with voices very restrained. The entrance to it is underground, as though through a cave, which represented that of our Father Elijah. Certainly, I was feeling so much interior joy that I would have considered a longer journey well worthwhile. I regretted very much that the saintly woman through whom our Lord founded this house was now dead. I didn't deserve to see her, although I had desired to do so very much.
21. It seems to me that it would not be an idle thing to tell something here about her life and the means by which our Lord desired that this monastery be founded there. It has been of such benefits to souls in the surrounding area, as I have been told. On seeing the penance that was done by this holy woman, may you realize, my Sisters, how far behind we are and may you try harder to serve our Lord. There is no reason that we should do less, for we do not come from such noble and refined family descent. Although this is not important, I am mentioning it because she had lived a comfortable life in keeping with her status in society, for she was a descendant of the dukes of Cardona and thus she was called Doña Catalina de Cardona. After she had written to me a few times, she signed her letter with only the words, "the sinner."
22. Those who will write about her life will recount more in detail the many things that could be said about it before the Lord began to grant her such great favors. But in case you might not come to know of it, I will tell here what some trustworthy persons who knew her told me.
23. While this saintly woman was living among the nobility, she was always very concerned about her soul and did penance. The desire for penance greatly increased in her and also the longing to go where she could be alone to enjoy God and dedicate herself to doing penance without any hindrance. She spoke of this with her confessors, but they did not give their consent. I am not surprised that this seemed madness to them, since nowadays the world is very rooted in discretion and has almost forgotten the great favors God granted to the many holy men and women who served Him in the desert. But since His Majesty always favors authentic desires, enabling one to carry them out, He ordained that she go for confession to a Franciscan Father whose name is Fray Francisco de Torres. I know him well and consider him a saint. For many years he has been living a life of intense fervor, penance, and prayer, and been suffering many persecutions. He must know well the favors God grants to those who strive to receive them, and thus he told her not to give up but to follow the calling His Majesty granted her. I don't know if these were the exact words, but they must have been something like this since she carried them out at once.
24. She disclosed her plans to a hermit who was living in Alcalá and, without ever telling anyone about them, asked him to accompany her. They arrived at the place where the monastery now stands, and there she found a tiny cave hardly large enough for her; here he left her. But what love must have been hers since she wasn't worried about what there might be to eat or about the dangerous things that could happen to her, or about the bad reputation she would have when it was discovered that she had disappeared. How inebriated must have been this holy soul, so absorbed in not letting anyone prevent her from enjoying her Spouse. And how determined she was not to love the world, since she thus fled from all its satisfactions.
25. Let us consider this well, Sisters, and reflect on how with one blow she conquered everything. For although what you do by entering this holy religious order, offering your will to God, and professing so continual an enclosure may not be less, I wonder whether, in the case of some, a part of this initial fervor does not pass away and out of self-love we make ourselves subject again to some things. May it please the divine Majesty that this not be so, but that since we imitate this holy woman in desiring to flee from the world we may interiorly stay far away from it in all things.
26. I have heard many things about the harsh austerity of her life, and what is known must be the smallest part of it. She must have treated her body terribly because she lived for many years in that solitude with such great desires to do penance and no one to restrain her. I will mention what some persons heard from her directly as well as what the nuns at St. Joseph's in Toledo heard. She went to visit these latter and spoke with them as candidly as with her own sisters. She spoke thus with other persons, too, for her simplicity and humility must have been great. And as one who was convinced that she had nothing of herself, she was far removed from any kind of vainglory and she enjoyed telling about the favors God granted her so that through them His name might be praised and glorified. Doing this would be dangerous for those who have not reached this state, for, at least, it will seem that they are praising themselves. But her candidness and holy simplicity must have freed her from this fault, for I never heard anyone accuse her of it.
27. She said that she had been living in that cave eight years and that on many days she ate only herbs and roots from the field, for after the three loaves of bread given her by the hermit who accompanied her were gone, she had no more until met by a little shepherd who was passing by. Afterward, he provided her with bread and flour, with which she made small cakes baked over the fire. This was all she ate, and she did so only on each third day. This fact is very certain, for even the friars who are there testify to it, and this went on after she was already very thin and wasted. Sometimes when she went to speak with the friars about how to found a monastery they made her eat a sardine, or other things, and rather than benefit from this she was harmed. She never drank wine as far as I know. She took the discipline with a heavy chain, and it used to last often two hours or an hour and a half. The chains she wore were extremely sharp, for a person told me (a woman) that in going there on pilgrimage she remained for the night and feigning sleep she saw her taking the chains off and cleaning them since they were full of blood. But according to what she told the nuns I mentioned, that which she underwent with the devils was greater, for they appeared to her as huge dogs, and jumped up on her shoulders, and at other times as snakes. She had no fear at all of them.
28. After the monastery was built, she still used to go to her cave, sleep there, and remain there except when she attended the Divine Office. And before the monastery was founded she used to go for Mass to that of the Mercedarians, which was a quarter of a league away; and sometimes she went on her knees. Her garb was made of coarse cloth, and her inner tunic of rough wool, made in such a way that she was thought to be a man.
After these years that she lived there in such solitude, our Lord desired that her way of life become known, and the people began to venerate her so much that she could not get away from them. She spoke to everyone with great charity and love. As time went on, a greater concourse of people came; and those who were able to speak to her considered themselves lucky. She was so worn out from this that she said they were killing her. There were days when the whole field was almost filled with wagons. After the friars came there, there was no other remedy than for them to have her lifted up high so that she could bless all the people, and with that they were freed of them. After eight years in which she lived in the cave (which was now larger, for it had been made so by those who had gone there), she became so sick that she thought she was going to die, and she suffered it all in that cave.
29. She began to have desires that a monastery of friars be founded there, and these persisted for some time without her knowing from which order they would come. Once while praying before a crucifix she always carried with her, our Lord showed her a white mantle, and she understood that they would come from the discalced Carmelites, and she had never known that there were friars like this in the world. At the time only two monasteries of friars had been founded, Mancera and Pastrana. After this experience, she must have inquired. When she learned there was a monastery in Pastrana and since she had been in the past a close friend of the Princess of Eboli, wife of Prince Ruy Gómez, to whom Pastrana belonged, she went there to find out how she might make this foundation which she had been desiring so much.
30. There at the monastery of Pastrana, in the church of St. Peter, for this it is called, she received the habit of our Lady, although not with the intention of being a nun or of making profession, for she was never inclined toward being a nun since our Lord was leading her by another path. It seemed to her that if she professed obedience her plan to live in harsh austerity and solitude would be frustrated. All the friars were present when she received the habit of our Lady of Mt. Carmel.
31. In their company was Father Mariano, who I mentioned in these foundations. He told me that he himself had experienced at the time a suspension or rapture that carried him completely out of himself and that while in this state he saw many dead friars and nuns. Some were beheaded, some had their arms and feet cut off as though they were martyred, for martyrdom is what this vision was pointing to. And he is not the type of man who would tell what he had not seen, nor has his spirit ever been accustomed to these suspensions, for God does not lead him by such a path. Pray to God, Sisters, that this vision will come true and that we will merit in our times to see so great a blessing and be ourselves among the martyrs.
32. From here, that is, from Pastrana, the holy woman of Cardona began to seek the means to found her monastery and for this purpose she went back to the court which she had so eagerly left before. Doing this must have been no small torment; it was a place where she underwent much criticism and trial. When she left the house where she was staying, she wasn't able to protect herself from the crowd. This happened wherever she went. Some cut pieces from her habit, others from her mantle. She then went to Toledo where she stayed with our nuns. All of them have affirmed to me that the odor of sanctity emanating from her was so great that it permeated even her cincture and habit, which she exchanged for another given her by the nuns; it was something to praise God for. And the closer they came to her the greater was this fragrance, even though her manner of dress, because of the intense heat, would rather have caused a bad odor. I know that they wouldn't say anything but the complete truth, and thus they were left with great devotion.
33. In the court and elsewhere they gave her the means for the monastery, and once she obtained the license, it was founded. The church was built at the place where her cave was. Another cave was made for her further away in which she had a tomb carved out, and she remained there most of the day and night. She lived this way only a short time, for about five and a half years after the monastery was built. That she lived even as long as she did seemed supernatural because of her harsh, austere life. Insofar as I can remember, she died in 1577. Her funeral services were held with greatest solemnity, for a gentleman named Fray Juan de León had great devotion to her and arranged it all with much care. She is now buried temporarily in a chapel of our Lady, to whom she was extremely devoted, until a church larger than the one they have now will be built to keep her blessed body as is fitting.
34. Great is the devotion they have to her in this monastery, and it seems it remained there and in the surrounding area, especially when they beheld that solitude and cave in which she lived. The friars have testified to me that before she decided to found the monastery, she became so wearied and afflicted at seeing the large number of people coming to see her that she wanted to go to another place where no one would know of her. She sent for the hermit who brought her there so that he might bring her elsewhere, but he was dead. And our Lord who was resolved that this house of our Lady be founded there did not allow her to leave, for as I have said, I know He is served very much there. The friars have all that is necessary for their way of life, and it is clear that they like to be isolated from people; especially the prior, for God also drew him away from a life of much luxury and has repaid him with special consolation.
35. The prior was very charitable toward us. The friars contributed to our foundation from what they had in the church, for since this holy woman was much loved by so many noble persons, their church was well provided with sacred furnishings. I was very much consoled during the time I was there, although this was accompanied by much shame which continues. I saw that the one who had done such harsh penance there was a woman like me, but more delicate because of her background, and not so great a sinner as I. For in this matter there is no comparison between us, and I have received much greater favors of many kinds from our Lord, and that I am not in hell because of my sins is among the greatest of favors. The desire alone to imitate her, if I could, consoled me; but not much, for all my life has passed in desires, but the deeds I do not perform. May the mercy of God help me. In Him I have always trusted through His most sacred Son and the Virgin, our Lady, whose habit I wear through the goodness of the Lord.
36. One day when I had just received Communion in that holy church, very great recollection came over me with suspension that drew me out of myself. In this suspension, through an intellectual vision, this holy woman appeared in a glorified body and some angels with her. She told me not to grow weary but that I should strive to go ahead with these foundations. I understood, although she did not indicate this, that she was helping me before God. She also told me something else but there is no reason to put it here in writing. I was left very much consoled and with a great desire to work hard, and I hope in the goodness of the Lord that with help as good as are these prayers of hers I will be able to serve Him in some way.
You can see here, my Sisters, how her trials have now come to an end, but the glory she enjoys will have no end. Let us now force ourselves for love of our Lord, to follow this sister of ours. Holding ourselves in abhorrence as she abhorred herself, we will finish our day's journey, for it goes by so quickly and all comes to an end.
37. We arrived in Villanueva de la Jara on the first Sunday of Lent, the feast of St. Barbaciani, the vigil of the feast of the Chair of St. Peter, in the year 1580. On this same day at the time of the high Mass, the Blessed Sacrament was reserved in the church of the glorious St. Anne. The city council and some others along with Doctor Ervías came out to receive us, and we got down from our wagons at the church in the town, which was quite far from St. Anne's. The joy of the whole town was so great. It gave me much consolation to see the happiness with which they received the order of the Blessed Virgin, our Lady. We had heard from afar the peal of the church bells. Once we were inside the church, they began the Te Deum, one verse sung by the choir and the other played by the organ. When it was finished, they carried the Blessed Sacrament on one portable platform and a statue of our Lady on another, and crosses and banners. The procession proceeded with much pomp. We were in the middle near the Blessed Sacrament with our white mantles and our veils covering our faces, and next to us were many of our discalced friars from their monastery and Franciscans from the monastery of St. Francis that was located there, and one Dominican who happened to be present (even though he was alone it made me happy to see that habit there). Since the distance was great, there were many altars set up along the way. From time to time the procession stopped and some verses were recited in honor of our order which moved us to great devotion. So did the sight of all of them praising the great God present in our midst and the fact that because of Him they paid so much honor to us seven poor, little discalced nuns who were there. While I was engaged in all these reflections, I became very ashamed in recalling that I was among them and that if they were to do what I deserved they would all turn against me.
38. I have given you so long an account of this honor that was rendered to the habit of the Virgin so that you might praise our Lord and beg Him that he be served in this foundation. I am happier when there is much persecution and many trials, and I tell about them more eagerly. The truth is that these Sisters that were here suffered persecution and trial for almost six years, at least for the five and a half years that they were in this house of the glorious St. Anne. They suffered these in addition to the great poverty and hardship they had in earning their food, for they never wanted to ask for alms. The reason for the latter was that they didn't think the purpose of their being in the monastery was that others might give them to eat. Furthermore, they did great penance, both by fasting often and eating little, and by their uncomfortable beds and very small house, which was a great hardship because of the strict enclosure that they always observed.
39. Their greatest trial, they told me, came from their intense desire to see themselves clothed with the habit. This was a terrible torment to them day and night since they thought they might never see the desire fulfilled, and thus all their prayers, frequently accompanied by tears, were that God might grant them this favor. And whenever some delay came along, they became extremely distressed and increased their penance. They deprived themselves of food in order to pay from their earnings the messengers sent to me and also for the gifts of gratitude, in their poor way, to those who were able to help them in some way. After having spoken with them and seen their holiness, I well understand that it was through their prayers and tears that they obtained the favor to be admitted into the order. And thus I considered it a far greater treasure to have souls like these in the order than to have a good deal of income, and I hope that the house will prosper.
40. Well when we entered the house, all were inside at the door. Each one was dressed in her individual way, as she was when she entered, and they never wanted to wear the habit of beatas since they were hoping for this foundation, although what they were wearing was very simple. It appeared from their indifferent manner of dress that they took little care of themselves, and almost all were so thin that their life of great penance was evident.
41. They received us with many tears of great joy. It was obvious that these were not feigned, nor were their great virtues, their joy, humility, and obedience to the prioress. They don't know how to please enough those nuns who came to make the foundation. All their fear was that we might turn around and go back when we saw their poverty and the small size of their house. None of them had acted as superior, but with much sisterly love each of them worked as much as she could. The two oldest took care of business matters when necessary; the others never spoke with anyone, nor did they want to. They had no lock for the door but only a bolt; none of them dared to go to the door; only the oldest answered. They slept very little so as to earn their bread and not lose time for prayer in which they spent many hours -- on feast days the whole day.
42. They guided themselves with books by Fray Luis de Granada and Fray Peter of Alcántara. They recited the Divine Office most of the time despite their little ability to read, for only one of them read well. And they did not have identical breviaries. Some used old roman breviaries that were given by priests who no longer used them; others used whatever they could find. And since they did not know how to read, they spent many hours at this. They did not recite the Office in a place where they could be heard by outsiders. God must have accepted their good intention and effort, for they must have said little that was correct. When Father Fray Antonio de Jesús began to guide them, he ordered them to recite only the Office of our Lady. They had their own oven for baking bread. And they did everything with as much harmony as they would have done under a superior.
43. All this made me praise our Lord, and the more I dealt with them the happier I was that I had come. It seems to me that however many the hardships I would have had to go through, I would not have wanted to fail to console these souls. My companions who remained there told me that on the very first days they experienced some opposition, but as they got to know these new Sisters better and learn of their virtue, they felt very happy to remain with them and loved them very much. Great is the power of holiness and virtue. The truth is that even though they met with many difficulties and trials these Sisters bore them well, with the favor of the Lord, because they desired to suffer in His service. And the Sister that does not feel within herself this desire should not consider herself a true discalced nun, for our desires must not be for rest but for suffering in order to imitate in something our true Spouse. May it please His Majesty to give us grace for this, amen.
44. The origin of this shrine of St. Anne was as follows. There lived in this town of Villanueva de la Jara a priest born in Zamora who had been a friar of our Lady of Mt. Carmel. He was a devotee of the glorious St. Anne. His name was Diego de Guadalajara, and he built near his house this shrine in which Mass could be heard. And in his great devotion he went to Rome and brought back a bull with many indulgences for this church or shrine. He was a virtuous and recollected man. He stipulated in his will that after his death this house and all his possessions be used for a monastery of nuns of our Lady of Mt. Carmel and that if this could not be done a chaplain be appointed to say some Masses each week and that if and when the monastery were built there would be no obligation to say the Masses.
45. The property so remained, with a chaplain, for more than twenty years, and the estate diminished in value. When the women began living in the house, they received only the house. The chaplain was in another house that belonged to the same chaplaincy which he will now leave to them along with the rest of the estate which amounts to very little. But the mercy of God is so great that He will not fail to favor the house of His glorious grandmother. May it please His Majesty that He be always served in it, and may all creatures praise Him forever and ever, amen.

CHAPTER 29
 
Treats of the foundation of St. Joseph of Our Lady of the Street in Palencia. It was made in the year 1580 on the feast of King David.
 
1. Having returned from the foundation of Villanueva de la Jara, the major superior ordered me to go to Valladolid at the request of the Bishop of Palencia, Don Alvaro de Mendoza. This was the bishop who had accepted and favored the first monastery, St. Joseph's in Avila, and always favors whatever pertains to this order. Since he was transferred from the diocese of Avila to that of Palencia, our Lord inspired him with the desire to found there another monastery of this sacred order. When I reached Valladolid, I was struck down with so bad an illness that they thought I was going to die. I felt so listless and so unable even to think of doing anything that I could not be persuaded even though the prioress of our monastery in Valladolid who desired this foundation very much was pressing me to go ahead with it. But neither could I find any basis for doing so because the monastery had to be founded in poverty, and they told me that it could not be sustained because the city was very poor.
2. For almost a year this foundation had been a subject of discussion along with that of Burgos. Previously, I had not been so opposed to it, but now, even though I had not come to Valladolid for any other purpose, I found many obstacles. I don't know whether this was due to my severe illness and the resulting weakness or to the devil who wanted to hinder the good that was done afterward. Indeed, I am surprised and saddened. Often I complain to our Lord about how much the poor soul shares in the illness of the body. I seems the soul can do nothing but abide by the laws of the body and all its needs and changes.
3. One of the great trials and miseries of life, I think, is this helplessness experienced when there is no strong spirit to bring the body into submission. For if the soul is alert, I don't consider the suffering of illness and pain a problem, even though this may be a trial, for the soul is praising God and accepting this as coming from His hand. But it is a terrible thing on the one hand to be suffering and on the other not to be doing anything. This is especially true if the soul has experienced great desires not to rest interiorly or exteriorly but to occupy itself completely in the service of its great God. It has no other remedy here than patience, knowledge of its misery, and abandonment of itself to the will of God who makes use of it for what He wants and in the way He wants. This is the condition I was in then, although I was already convalescing. But, nonetheless, the weakness was so great that I lost even the confidence God usually gives me when I begin one of these foundations. Everything looked impossible to me. If I had met some person at the time to encourage me, this would have been a great help. But some only added to my fear; others, even though they gave me some hope, did not encourage me enough to help me overcome my faintheartedness.
4. It happened that a Father from the Society came there, named Maestro Ripalda, who had been my confessor some time before and was a great servant of God. I told him about my situation, that I wanted to consider him to be standing in God's place, and asked him to tell me what he thought about the foundation. He began to encourage me very much. He told me that I was growing old and that this was the reason for my cowardice. But I saw clearly that this was not the reason, for I am older now and do not experience such timidity. And he too must have understood this, but he scolded me so that I wouldn't think God was behind it. I was then considering the foundations of Palencia and Burgos together, and I had nothing for either of them. But this was not the cause of the way I felt, for I am used to beginning with less. He told me that I should by no means give them up. I had been told the same thing a little previously by a provincial from the Society, named Baltasar Alvarez, but at that time I was well.
5. His words were not enough to get me to make the decision to go ahead, although they were very helpful. I did not make up my mind completely because either the devil, or as I said, the illness held me bound; but I felt much better. The prioress at Valladolid assisted me as much as she could because she greatly desired the foundation of Palencia. But since she saw me so lukewarm about it, she too was afraid. Now let the true ardor come, for neither the nations nor the servants of God suffice! Therefore, it is often made clear that it is not I who do anything in these foundations, but the work is His who is all powerful in everything.
6. One day just after having received Communion and in the midst of this vacillation and indecision about making any foundation, I begged the Lord to enlighten me so that I might do His will in everything. The lukewarmness was not of the kind that could ever take away as much as one iota from this desire. Our Lord answered in a kind of reprehensive way: "What do you fear? When have I failed you? I am the same now as I was before. Do not neglect to make these two foundations." O great God! How different are your words from those of men! I was thereby left with such determination and courage that the whole world would not have been enough to oppose me. I began at once to make arrangements for them, and our Lord began to give me the means.
7. I took two nuns with me to go and buy the house. Now even though they told me it was impossible to live on alms in Palencia, I may as well not have been told, because I already saw that it was impossible at that time to make a foundation that could have an income. I knew that since God said I should found one, His Majesty would provide. Thus, although my health had not returned entirely, I decided to go despite the harsh weather. I left Valladolid on the feast of the Holy Innocents in the year that I mentioned, for a gentleman had given us a house he had rented in which we could live from the beginning of the new year until the feast of St. John the Baptist, for he had gone to live elsewhere.
8. I wrote to a canon of this city even though I did not know him. But a friend of his told me that he was a servant of God, and I became convinced that he would be a great help to us. For the Lord Himself, as seen in the other foundations, chooses in each place someone to help Him. His Majesty already knows the little that I can do. I sent a message to beg this gentleman to have the house vacated as secretly as possible, for it was occupied, and not to tell the occupant who was coming. For even though some of the nobility showed their good will and the bishop was very eager for the foundation, I saw that the safest thing was to keep it from being known.
9. Canon Reinoso, for that is the name of the one to whom I wrote, did so good a job that not only did he have the house vacated but he provided beds and a plentiful supply of things. We needed them because the weather was very cold and the previous day had been a troublesome one with fog so thick we could hardly see each other. Indeed, we had little rest until we had prepared a place to say Mass the following day, because before anyone was aware of it we had arrived. I have found that this quiet way of arriving is more fitting, for if we begin discussing opinions, the devil disturbs everything; even though he cannot gain, he stirs unrest. This is what we did, for early in the morning, almost at dawn, a priest who came with us, named Porras, a very good servant of God, said Mass. Also with us was another friend of the nuns of Valladolid, named Augustín de Vitoria, who had lent me money to furnish the house and with much care had assisted me on the journey.
10. There were five of us nuns who went to Palencia. With us, as well, was a lay Sister, a companion who has for some time been going about with me. She is a great and discreet servant of God who can help me more than others who are choir Sisters. That night we slept little, although, as I say, the journey had been laborious because of the heavy rains.
11. I was very pleased that the foundation was made on that day since the Office was of King David to whom I am devoted. Immediately that morning I sent word to His Excellency, the bishop, who did not know yet that I was arriving that day. He came at once with the great charity he has always shown us. He told us that he would give us all the bread we needed, and he ordered his administrator to provide many things for us. There is so much that this order owes him, that whoever reads about these, its foundations, is obliged to recommend him, whether living or dead, to our Lord, and this I ask out of charity. The joy of the people was so great and universal that there was not even one person who disapproved, which was something very unusual. Their knowing that the bishop wanted it contributed greatly to this since he was much loved in that place. The people are among the most gentle and noble that I have ever seen, and so every day I rejoice more in having made that foundation there.
12. Since the house was not ours, we immediately began to negotiate to buy another, for even though this one was up for sale, it was in a very bad place. And with the help I had from the nuns who came, it seemed that we could buy something. Although the amount was small, for that city it was a lot. But if God had not given us the good friends that He did, all would have been to no avail. For the good canon Reinoso brought a friend of his, named Canon Salinas, of great charity and understanding, and they were both as concerned as if the matter were their own -- even more so, I believe -- and they were always concerned about that house.
13. There was in the town a shrine that inspired much devotion to our Lady called Our Lady of the Street. The devotion to her in the city and the entire region is great, and many people go there. It seemed to His Excellency and to all the people that it would be good for us to be near that church. It did not have a house attached to it, but there were two nearby which, if we bought, would be enough for us along with the church. The church had to be given to us by both the cathedral chapter and some members of the confraternity, and thus we started to try to obtain it. The cathedral chapter made us a gift of it at once, and although the negotiations with the confraternity were more difficult, the members also agreed. As I have said, if I have ever seen virtuous people in my life, they are the people of this town.
14. Since the owners of the houses saw our interest in them, they began to value them more, and rightly so. I wanted to go to see the houses, and they looked so bad to me that I didn't want them at all, nor did those who came with us. Afterward, it was clearly seen that the devil had a great role to play because it upset him that we would be there. The two canons who were negotiating about it thought that the houses were far from the cathedral, as they were, but in a more populated area of the city. We finally all decided that those houses were unsuitable for us and that we should look for another. This is what the two canons began to do those days. And they did so with such care and diligence, without failing to look at anything they thought might be suitable, that it made me praise our Lord. They became pleased with one house whose owner was named Tamayo. Some parts of the house were just right for our needs, and it was near the house of a noble gentleman, named Suero de Vega, who helps us very much. He as well as other persons in the district were eager that we make the foundation there.
15. That house was not large enough, but they offered us another along with it, although this other was not the kind that could be easily adapted to the first. In sum, from the information they gave me about it, I desired that we go ahead. But the canons did not want to do so until I saw the houses first. I am so reluctant to go into the town, and I trusted so much in them that they couldn't get me to go. Finally, I went to see them and also those of our Lady of the Street, although not with the intention of buying these latter but only so that the owner of the others would not think that we had no other choice. And they had looked so bad to me, as I have mentioned, and to those who had come with me that now we are surprised that we could have thought them so bad. After that, we went to the other place, determined that those houses would be the ones for us. Although we found many difficulties, we accepted them. Yet the houses were not easy to fix up, for in order to make a church, and even then not a large one, all the good space for living quarters would have had to be taken away.
16. It is a strange thing to be resolved about something. Indeed, it was providential that I trusted little in myself, although that time I was not the only one who was mistaken. In sum, we already had it in mind to buy the houses and no other and to pay what was asked for them, which was high, and write to the owner, who was not in the city but nearby.
17. That I have gone into such detail about the buying of the houses will seem pointless until it is seen that the devil's aim was to prevent us from buying those of Our Lady of the Street. Every time I think of it, it makes me fear.
18. We were all determined, as I have said, not to buy any other. One day while I was at Mass I became very worried as to whether I was doing the right thing, and a restlessness came over me that left me almost no quiet during the whole Mass. I went to receive the Blessed Sacrament, and immediately after receiving it I heard these words: "This is the one that suits you." They were such that they made me resolve definitely not to buy those I was thinking of but those of Our Lady of the Street.
I began to consider what a difficult thing it would be to do this since the business deal had been much discussed and was so dear to those who had looked after it with such care. The Lord answered me: "They do not understand how much I am offended there, and this will be a great remedy." It occurred to me that perhaps this locution might be false, although I could not believe this, for I recognized clearly from its effects that it was from the Spirit of God. The Lord said to me at once: "It is I."
19. I was left very peaceful and the disturbance I had before was taken away, although I did not know how to remedy what had been done and the many bad things that had been said about the houses, or what to say to my Sisters to whom I had stressed how bad the condition of them was and that we should in no way move there without seeing them. Yet this did not concern me so much, for I already knew that the Sisters would be agreeable to whatever I might do. But I was concerned about the others and their desire. It seemed to me they would take me to be vain and unstable since I changed my mind so quickly, something I greatly abhor doing. All these thoughts were not enough to move me either much or little to give up going to the houses of our Lady, nor did I think about their bad condition. Provided the nuns could prevent as much as one venial sin, the rest was of little importance; and in my opinion any of them knowing what I knew would have agreed with me.
20. I had recourse to the following: My confessor was Canon Reinoso, one of the two who was helping me. I was not confiding to him spiritual matters of this sort because the occasion had not arisen in which there was needed to do so. Since it has always been my custom in these matters, so as to walk along a more secure path, to do what the confessor advises me, I decided to tell him under much secrecy, even though I could not renounce doing what I had heard without feeling much distress. But, in the end, I told him I trusted our Lord would do what I saw at other times, for His Majesty changes the mind of the confessor who is of another opinion so that what He wants is done.
21. I told him first of how the Lord was accustomed to teaching me often in this way and that up to that point many things had happened by which it was understood that these experiences were from His Spirit. I recounted what took place but told him that I would do whatever he thought, even if it would be painful for me. He is very discreet, holy, and shows good judgment in everything, even though he is young. Although he saw that there would be unfavorable comment, he decided not to go against what had been heard. I told him that we should wait for the messenger, and he agreed, for I trusted that God would take care of things. And so it happened, for even though we had agreed to all that the owner wanted and had requested, he asked for another three hundred ducats, which seemed foolish because we were already paying more than enough. In this we saw the hand of God because the sale was very good for the owner, and since the agreement had been made there was no sense to his asking for more.
22. What he did helped matters very much, for we said there would be no end to this. But it didn't help completely, because it was clear that if the house was suitable for conversion into a monastery, three hundred ducats wasn't reason enough to forgo the house. I told my confessor that if he thought we should buy the house of Our Lady of the Street he shouldn't worry about my reputation but tell his companion that I was determined to buy Our Lady of the Street whether it was expensive or cheap, in miserable condition or good. Since his companion is very intelligent and alert, I believe that in seeing so quick a change he suspected something about my experience even though nothing was said to him about it, and so he did not press me any further.
23. Afterward we all saw clearly the big mistake we would have made in buying the other one. For now we are surprised to see the great advantage the one has over the other, not to mention the main advantage, for it is clearly seen that our Lord and His glorious Mother are served there and that many occasions of sin are being removed. In fact, many night vigils were held there, and since nothing more was there than the shrine, many things could be done that the devil was sad to see taken away. And we were happy to be able to serve in some way our Mother, Lady, and Patroness. And it was very wrong to have done otherwise previously, for we should not have considered any other house. Obviously, the devil was causing blindness in many matters, for there are many conveniences in Our Lady of the Street that would not have been found elsewhere. And all the townspeople were overjoyed for they had been desiring that the monastery be there, and even those who had wanted us to go to the other house were now very pleased with this one.
24. May He who enlightened me in this regard be blessed forever and ever. And He enlightens me thus in anything I manage to do well, for each day I am more amazed at the little talent I have for anything. And don't think that what I'm saying comes from humility, for each day I see it more clearly. It seems our Lord desires me and all other to know that it is only His Majesty who does these works, and that as He gave sight with mud to the blind man, He wants someone as blind as I to do something worth more than mud. Certainly, in this whole matter there were things, as I have said, involving great blindness, and each time I recall it, I would like to praise our Lord again for it. But even for this I'm no good, nor do I know how He puts up with me. Blessed be His mercy, amen.
25. Well these holy canons, friends of the Virgin, immediately made haste to negotiate a contract for the houses and, in my opinion, they got them at a low price. They worked hard, for in each of these foundations God desires that those who help will merit. And I am the one who does nothing, as I have said at other times; and I would never want to stop saying this, because it is the truth. For they worked very hard in getting the house ready, and also gave money for it, because I didn't have any, and together with this they became the guarantors. In other foundations I had to undergo some anxiety before I found a guarantor, and not for so large an amount as in this instance. And that was understandable; the guarantors had to trust the Lord, for I didn't have a cent. But His Majesty has always granted me a favor which I consider very great; no one has ever lost anything by being a guarantor for me, nor was there any failure to pay back in full.
26. Since the owners of the houses were not satisfied with the two guarantors, the two went to look for the administrator of the diocese whose name was Prudencio. (I don't know if I remember correctly. They tell me this now, for since at that time we called him the administrator, I did not learn his name.) He is so charitable with us, for we owed him much and still do. He asked them where they were going; they answered they were looking for him to have him sign that guarantee. He laughed and said: "Well now, you ask for a guarantee for so much money in a way like this?" And he signed it at once while sitting on top his mule, which nowadays is something worth pondering.
27. I would not want to fail to sing the praises of the charity that I found in Palencia both in general and in particular. Truly, it seemed to me like being in the early Church, at least it is not usual now to see such a thing in the world. We had no income and they had to provide us with food, and not only were they not opposed to the foundation but they said that God was doing them the greatest favor. And if considered in the light of faith, what they said was the truth, for just to have one more church where the Blessed Sacrament is reserved is a great deal.
28. May He be blessed forever, amen. For as time goes on it is becoming clearly understood that our Lord is served by the fact that the foundation is in that place and that some inappropriate things must have been done there that are no longer done. Since many people went there for the night vigil and the shrine was in an isolated spot, not everyone went out of devotion. The situation is getting better. The statue of our Lady had been displayed with very little reverence. The bishop, Don Alvaro de Mendoza, had a chapel made in the shrine for it, and little by little things are being done for the honor and glory of this glorious Virgin and her Son. May He be praised forever, amen, amen.
29. Well, when the house was ready for occupation by the nuns, the bishop wanted this to take place with great solemnity. And so it did, one day during the octave of the feast of the Blessed Sacrament. He came himself from Valladolid, and the cathedral chapter, the religious orders, and all the people of the city joined him in the procession. There was much music. We all, with our white mantles and veils covering our faces, went in procession from the house where we were staying to a parish that was close to our Lady's house where the statue was brought to meet us, and from there we took the Blessed Sacrament and had it reserved in the church with great and well-organized solemnity. It caused much devotion. Other nuns who were on their way to the foundation in Soria came with us, all carrying candles. I believe that the Lord was very much praised that day in that city. May it please Him that He be praised forever by all creatures, amen, amen.
30. While I was in Palencia, God willed that the discalced Carmelites be separated from the calced. This was done by letting the discalced form their own province, which was all that we were desiring for the sake of our peace and tranquility. At the request of our Catholic king, Don Philip, a very long brief was obtained from Rome for this purpose. And thus his majesty by obtaining this brief favored us as much as he did in the beginning. The chapter was held in Alcalá presided over by a Reverend Father named Fray Juan de las Cuevas who was then prior of Talavera. He belongs to the Dominican order and was appointed by Rome after having been nominated by his majesty. He is a very holy and prudent man, which was necessary for such a task. The king paid for their expenses, and at his orders the entire university of Alcalá helped them. With much peace and harmony the chapter was held in the College of St. Cyril, that of our discalced friars. They elected Father Maestro Gracián de la Madre de Dios as provincial.
31. Because these Fathers will write elsewhere about what took place, there is no reason for me to deal with it. I have mentioned the matter because it was while I was engaged in the work of this foundation that our Lord brought to a conclusion an endeavor that was so important for the honor and glory of His glorious Mother since it concerned her order. She is our Lady and our Patroness. And this for me was one of the great joys and satisfactions of my life. It would take a long time to tell of the trials, persecutions, and afflictions that I have had to undergo during the past twenty-five years, and only our Lord can understand them. Save for anyone who knows the trials that were suffered, one cannot grasp the joy that came to my heart at seeing the matter concluded and the desire I had that everybody praise our Lord and that we pray for this our holy king, Don Philip. By means of him God brought the matter to a happy ending. Had it not been for the king, the devil was so cunning that everything would have collapsed.
32. Now we are all at peace, calced and discalced; no one can hinder us from serving our Lord. Hence, my Brothers and Sisters, since His Majesty has heard your prayers so well, let us make haste to serve Him. Let those in the present who are eye-witnesses, consider the favors He has granted us and the trials and disturbances from which He has delivered us. And those who are to come, when they find everything running smoothly, let them, for the love of our Lord, not neglect anything relating to perfection. May that which is said of some orders that praise their beginnings not be said of them. Now we are beginning, and let them strive to advance always from good to better. Let them beware, for the devil through very small things drill holes through which very large things enter. May it not happen that those who are to come say: "These things are not important; don't go to extremes." Oh, my daughters, everything that helps us advance is important.
33. For love of our Lord I beg you to remember how soon everything comes to an end, to remember the favor our Lord has granted us in bringing us to this order and the great punishment that will befall anyone who might introduce some mitigation. Rather, fix your eyes always on the ancestry from which we come, those holy prophets. How many saints we have in heaven who have worn this habit! Let us adopt the holy presumption that with the Lord's help we will be like them. The battle will be brief, my Sisters, and the end is eternal. Let us set aside these things that in themselves are nothing, using only those that lead us to this end without end, so as to love Him and serve Him more, for He will live forever and ever, amen, amen. Thanks be to God.

CHAPTER 30
 
Begins to treat of the foundation of the monastery of the Blessed Trinity in the city of Soria. It was founded in 1581. The first Mass was said on the feast of our Father St. Elisha.
 
1. While I was occupied with the foundation in Palencia, which was mentioned, they brought me a letter from the Bishop of Osma, named Doctor Velázquez. While he was canon and professor at the cathedral in Toledo and I was still experiencing some fears, I sought to consult him because I knew he was a very learned man and a servant of God. I entreated him urgently to guide my soul and hear my confession. Although he was very busy, I asked him to do so for the love of our Lord. He saw my need and responded so willingly that I was surprised. And I consulted and confessed to him all the time that I was in Toledo, which was a long time. I spoke to him about my soul with complete openness as I usually do. This did me so much good that from then on my fears began to lessen. True, there was another reason for consulting him which I won't go into here. But, in fact, he was very helpful to me because he assured me with passages from Sacred Scripture, which is what suits me most when I am sure that one knows it well. I knew he did and that he lived a good life.
2. This letter was written from Soria where he was at that time. He told me how a lady, a penitent of his there, spoke to him about a foundation of our nuns, which she thought would be a good thing, and that he had told her he would try to convince me to go there to make the foundation. He said I should not disappoint him and that if I thought the foundation was fitting I should let him know and he would send for me. I was very happy because, in addition to the fact that the place was good for a foundation I wanted to see him and tell him some things about my soul. I had grown to love him very much because of the great progress my soul made under his guidance.
3. The name of this lady who wanted the foundation was Doña Beatriz de Beamonte y Navarra because she is a descendant from the kings of Navarra and is a daughter of Don Francés de Beamonte who was of a noble and pure lineage. She was married for some years and had no children, but was very wealthy and for a long time had it in mind to provide for a monastery of nuns. She spoke of this with the bishop and he informed her about the discalced nuns of this order of our Lady. What he told her pleased her so much that she greatly urged him to have the foundation made.
4. She is a mild-mannered person, generous and penitent; in sum, a very great servant of God. She owned a good house that was well-constructed and in a good location in Soria. She told us that she would give it to us along with all that was necessary for a foundation, and this she gave together with a five hundred ducat annuity at twenty-five per thousand. The bishop promised to give us a very good church with a vaulted ceiling. The church was a parish church but so close by that we were able to make use of it by means of a covered passageway. The bishop was easily able to make this offer -- for he was poor -- because there were many churches there, and so he moved the parish to another church. He gave me an account of all this in his letter. I discussed the matter with Father Provincial who was there at the time. He and my friends thought I should write through a personal messenger. The foundation in Palencia was completed, and I was very happy about the one in Soria for the reasons mentioned.
5. I began to gather the nuns I was going to bring with me. There were seven, for that lady desired that there be more rather than less, in addition to a lay Sister, my companion, and myself. Somebody came for us with a stagecoach, which met our needs, for I had told the bishop that I had to bring two discalced Fathers with me. And so I brought with me Father Nicolás de Jesús María, a man of great perfection and discretion, a native of Genoa. He was over forty when he received the habit, I think -- at least he's forty now, and it's only a short while since he took the habit -- but he has advanced so far in a short time that it seems clear our Lord chose him so he might help the order during these very troublesome times of persecution. He has done a good deal. With respect to the others who could have helped, some were exiled, others imprisoned. Since he had no office, little attention was paid to him. For as I mentioned, it was only a short time that he was in the order. Or, God allowed this that there might be some help left for me.
6. He is so discreet that while he was staying in the monastery of the calced Carmelites in Madrid, as though for other business reasons, he dealt with the affairs of the discalced friars in such a disguised manner that the calced friars never knew about it, and so they didn't bother him. We corresponded frequently, for I was in the monastery of St. Joseph's in Avila, and we dealt with a suitable course of action, for this consultation gave him satisfaction. Hence it can be seen what need the order was in since so much attention was paid to me for want, as they say, of good men. It was during this time that I had experience of his perfection and discretion. Thus he is among those in this order whom I love much in the Lord and esteem highly.
7. Well, he and his lay brother companion accompanied us. He had little to do on this journey, for the one sent by the bishop conducted us in much comfort and was a help in finding good inns. When we entered the territory of the Bishop of Osma, the people loved the bishop so much that when told that this was one of his projects they directed us to the good inns. The weather was fine. The daily journeys were not long. Thus, little hardship was suffered on this trip; rather, it was a happy one, for hearing the people's praise of the bishop's holiness brought me the greatest joy. We arrived in El Burgo de Osma on the Wednesday before the octave day of the feast of the Blessed Sacrament. We received Communion there the following day, which was Thursday, the octave day. Since we could not reach Soria that day we stopped to eat along the way and passed that night in a church, which was not a bad place, because there was no other inn. The next day we heard Mass there and arrived in Soria around five in the afternoon. The holy bishop stood at a window in his house and blessed us from there, for we passed right by. This was no small consolation for me, since a blessing coming from a bishop and a saint is something to be highly esteemed.
8. That lady, the foundress, was waiting for us at the door of her house, where the monastery was to be established. We were anxious to get inside because of the large number of people. The crowd was nothing new, for everywhere we go there is much curiosity. The world is so fond of novelty that were it not for the veils we wear over our faces, these crowds would be a great trial. But with these veils, we can put up with them. That lady had decorated very well a large hall in which Mass was to be said, for the covered passageway leading to the church given us by the bishop had to be constructed. On another day, the feast of our Father St. Elisha, Mass was said.
9. That lady had prepared perfectly everything we had need of, and she let us use that hall, which was conducive to recollection, until the feast of the Transfiguration when the covered passageway was completed. It was on this feast that the first Mass in the church was said with great solemnity and in the presence of a large congregation. A Father from the Society preached the sermon, for the bishop had returned to El Burgo de Osma. The bishop never loses a day or an hour without working; although his health was not good, for he had lost his vision in one eye. This was my affliction in Soria, for it saddened me that the vision that was so beneficial in the service of the Lord should be lost. These are God's judgments. He must have allowed this so that His servant might gain, for the bishop did not work any less than before, and so as to test His servant's conformity with His will. The bishop told me it caused him no more distress than if it had happened to his neighbor and that sometimes he reflected that it would not grieve him if he lost sight in the other eye as well because this would allow him to live in a hermitage serving God without any other obligation. And at times he used to tell me that before becoming a bishop he had always felt called to be a hermit, and he had almost decided to give up everything and go off to become one.
10. I could not bear the thought of this since I thought he was of great benefit to the Church of God, and so I wanted him to have the office he now holds, although the day in which he was appointed bishop I felt a very great disturbance, since he sent me word immediately, as though I saw him weighed down with a heavy burden. I could neither help myself nor find peace, and I went to the choir to recommend him to the Lord. His Majesty gave me peace at once, telling me that He would be very much served by him, and this is what is really happening. Despite the illness in his eye and many other very painful illnesses and his everyday work, he fasts four days a week, and does other penances. His table consists of little that is gratifying. When he makes his visitations, he always goes on foot. His servants find this hard to put up with and complained to me about it. They must either be virtuous or not stay in his house. He has little trust in allowing important business to be handled by his administrators, and even, I think, any business; but he handles everything himself. In the beginning, for two years, he underwent the most savage persecutions there from false testimony. I was amazed because in matters of justice he is a man of integrity and rectitude. Now these persecutions are diminishing, although his persecutors had gone to the royal court and wherever they thought they could do harm. Since the good he is doing throughout the whole diocese is becoming known, these persecutions have little effect. And he has borne all of this with such perfection that he has confounded his persecutors, doing good to those he knew were doing evil to him. However much he has to do, he always finds time for prayer.
11. It seems I am becoming absorbed in praising this holy man, but I have said little. Nothing has been lost since I have mentioned this in order that it be known who is responsible for the foundation of the Blessed Trinity of Soria and also for the consolation of those who are to come, for those who are now here know the story well. Although he did not provide the income, he gave us the church and inspired this lady with the idea of the foundation, and, as I said, she has a great christian spirit and is virtuous and penitential.
12. Well, then, once we had taken possession of the church and prepared what was needed for the enclosure, it was necessary for me to go to the monastery of St. Joseph in Avila, and thus I departed immediately in the midst of very great heat along a road that was unfit for wagons. A prebendary from Palencia, named Ribera, accompanied me. He was the one who had been a great help in the work involving the covered passageway and in everything. The reason for this was that Father Nicolás de Jesús María left immediately after drawing up the contract, for there was great need of him elsewhere. This Ribera had certain business to attend to in Soria, and so he came with us. From then on, God gave him so much willingness to do good for us that he can be recommended to His Majesty as a benefactor of the order.
13. I didn't want anyone else to come with my companion and me, because this Ribera is so solicitous that he was enough for me, and the less noise there is on my journeys the better I feel. On this journey I paid well for the good trip I had in going to Soria, for, although the guide knew the way to Segovia, he did not know the wagon route. Thus, he led us into places in which we often had to get down from the wagon, and they almost had to carry it past some steep precipices. When we hired guides, they led us along the good roads and then, saying they had other things to do, abandoned us shortly before we came upon the bad roads. Prior to our arrival at an inn, about which we had not been sure, we had undergone much from the hot sun and from the many incidents in which the wagon turned over. I felt sorry for the prebendary who came with us. For now that we were told we were on the right road, we had to turn back and undo what we had done. But he was so rooted in virtue that it doesn't seem to me I ever saw him angry, which amazed me very much and made me praise our Lord, for when one is rooted in virtue, the occasions of sin are of little consequence. I praise the Lord for how He was pleased to bring us safely through that journey.
14. We arrived at St. Joseph's in Segovia on the vigil of St. Bartholomew. Our nuns had been worried because of the delay, for since the roads were so bad, the delay was long. There they provided us with every comfort, for God never gives me a trial without repaying for it immediately, and I rested for eight days or more. But this foundation was made with so little hardship that there is no reason to pay any attention to the hardship of this return journey, because it was nothing. I came back pleased since it seemed to me, and I hope in His mercy, that Soria is a place where God will be served because the foundation is there, as is already becoming evident. May He be blessed and praised from age to age, amen. Thanks be to God.

CHAPTER 31
 
Begins to treat in this chapter of the foundation of the glorious St. Joseph of Saint Anne in the city of Burgos. The first Mass was said April 19, the octave day of Easter, in 1582.
 
1. For over six years some members of the Society of Jesus, very conscientious, experienced, learned, and spiritual, were telling me that our Lord would be greatly served if a house of our sacred religious order were founded in Burgos. The reasons they gave for such a foundation made me begin to desire it. On account of the many trials within the order and in the other foundations, there had been no opportunity to attempt a foundation in Burgos.
2. In the year 1580, while I was in Valladolid, the Archbishop of Burgos passed through. Having been bishop in the Canary Islands, he was afterward appointed to the diocese of Burgos and at the time was going there. I asked the Bishop of Palencia, Don Alvaro de Mendoza, to ask him to give us permission for a foundation, and he said he would gladly ask him. Since he thinks our Lord is served in these houses, he is very pleased when one is founded. I have already spoken of how much Don Alvaro favors this order, for while bishop of Avila he accepted the first monastery of St. Joseph and always afterward has shown us much favor and considered the affairs of this order as his own, especially those about which I consult him.
3. The archbishop did not want to enter the city of Valladolid but stayed in the monastery of St. Jerome. There the bishop of Palencia had a great feast prepared for him and went to dine with him and invest him with a cincture, or I don't know what the ceremony was, that would make him an archbishop. It was there that Don Alvaro asked of him the permission for me to found a monastery in Burgos. The archbishop said that he would grant it gladly because even when he was in the Canary Islands he had desired and tried to get one of these monasteries, for he knew me personally and came from a place where one of our monasteries was located, and thus he knew how our Lord was served in them. As a result, the Bishop of Palencia told me the foundation would not fail for want of a license, for the archbishop had been very pleased about the project, and that since the Council requires the permission of the bishop but not that it be given in writing, the license could be considered as granted.
4. In speaking previously of the foundation of Palencia, I mentioned the great reluctance I had to making a foundation at that time because of the serious illness from which I was suffering. They had thought I would not live, and I had still not recovered. Yet illness does not usually affect me so much when I see that something is for the service of God, and thus I don't know the reason for my feeling so much repugnance as I then did. For if the reason had been scarcity of means, I had fewer in other foundations. To me, after I had seen what was to take place, the cause seemed to be the devil. And what has happened each time that there has been some trial in one of these foundations is that our Lord has always helped me with locutions and with deeds since He knows how miserable I am. I have thought, at times, how in some foundations in which there have been no trials, His Majesty didn't warn me about anything. The former is what happened here, for since He knew what I would have to undergo He immediately began to encourage me. May He be praised for everything! Thus, in respect to this foundation, as was mentioned in regard to that of Palencia, for both foundations were being discussed together, He asked, as though making a reprimand, what I was afraid of and when He had failed me: "I am the same; do not fail to make these two foundations." Since the courage these locutions have left in me has been mentioned, there is no reason for mentioning it again here. Immediately, all hesitation was taken from me. This makes it seem that the cause was not illness or old age. Thus I began to make plans for both, as was mentioned.
5. It seemed better to make the foundation in Palencia first, since it was closer, the weather was harsh, Burgos was so cold, and so as to please the good Bishop of Palencia; and this is what was done, as was mentioned. Since, while in Palencia, the request came for a foundation in Soria, it seemed better -- for in Palencia everything was finished -- to go there first and then to Burgos.
The Bishop of Palencia thought that an account should be given to the archbishop of what was taking place, and I begged him to do so. After I went to Soria, the bishop sent a canon, named Juan Alonso, from Palencia to the archbishop for no other purpose than that. And the archbishop wrote to me with much love of how he desired my coming, discussed the matter with the canon, and wrote to the bishop of Palencia submitting the matter to him, saying that what he did was because he knew the people of Burgos and knew that their consent was necessary in order to make the foundation.
6. In short, his conclusion was that I should go there and discuss the matter first with the city and that if the city would not give the permission he would give it to me because he was not going to let them tie his hands; and that he had witnessed the foundation of the monastery in Avila, which was the first, and remembered the great turmoil and opposition there and that he wanted to prevent this from happening in Burgos; and that it was not suitable to found a monastery unless with an income or with the consent of the city; that it would not be expedient for me and that that was why he was mentioning this.
7. The bishop considered that the deed was as good as done, and rightly so because the archbishop said I should come, and thus he sent me word that I should go. But my impression was that the archbishop lacked enthusiasm. I wrote to him thanking him for the favor he granted me but telling him that it seemed to me it would be worse to make a foundation against the will of the city than without asking them permission for it and that this would put His Excellency into more conflict (it seems I guessed the little help I would get from him if there were some opposition), and that I would try to obtain the permission from the city even though I knew this would be difficult because of the contradictory opinions usually held in matters like this. And I wrote to the Bishop of Palencia begging him that since summer was almost over and my illnesses were too many for me to be living in so cold a place we should let the idea rest for the time being. I did not express my doubts about the archbishop because the bishop was already displeased with him on account of the obstacles he was setting up after having shown so much willingness, and I did not want to cause some discord between them, because they were friends. Thus I went from Soria to Avila very unconcerned about going to Burgos so soon, and my going to the house of St. Joseph in Avila was very necessary for certain reasons.
8. There lived in this of Burgos a holy widow named Catalina de Tolosa, a native of Vizcaya. I could go on at length telling about her virtues, her penance as well as her prayer, her generous almsgiving and charity, her good intelligence and courage. She had given two of her daughters as nuns to our monastery of the Conception in Valladolid, I believe four years ago, and two others to Palencia, for she had been waiting that this latter foundation be made, and she brought them before I left.
9. All four turned out as one would expect of daughters brought up by such a mother, for they seemed to be no less than angels. She gave them good dowries and a full supply of other things, for she is very generous. Everything she does, she does to perfection; and she can do it because she is rich. When she came to Palencia we were so certain of the permission of the Archbishop of Burgos that it didn't seem there would be any reason to delay, and thus I asked her to look for a house to rent for me so that we could make the foundation and that she provide us with some grilles and turns and charge everything to me. The thought never passed through my mind that she would spend anything of her own but only lend to me. She desired the foundation so much that she was extremely sorry to see it being set aside for awhile. And thus I returned to Avila, as I have said, and was very unconcerned about dealing with the foundation at that time, but she was not so unconcerned. Thinking that all that was needed was permission from the city, she began to try to get it without telling me anything.
10. She had two neighbors, a mother and daughter, persons of high social status and very good servants of God who desired the foundation greatly. The mother, whose name was María Manrique, had a son who was a magistrate and whose name was Don Alonso de Santo Domingo Manrique. The daughter's name was Doña Catalina. Both mother and daughter discussed the matter with him so that he might seek permission from the city council. He spoke to Catalina de Tolosa asking what he should say about financial backing, for they wouldn't give the permission if there were none. She said, and this she did, that she would take on herself the obligation of giving us a house, if we had none, and also food. With this promise he presented a petition signed in his name. Don Alonso presented it with such skill that he obtained the permission from all the magistrates and from the archbishop, and he brought her the license in writing. As soon as she had begun dealing with the matter, she wrote to me that she was negotiating about the foundation. I thought she was joking because I know how reluctant people are to accept a monastery founded in poverty, and since I did not know, nor did it enter my mind, that she had obligated herself to provide for it, I thought that much more was needed.
11. Nevertheless, one day within the octave of St. Martin while I was recommending the foundation to our Lord, I thought that it could be made if the license were obtained. I couldn't bear the thought of going to a place as cold as Burgos with so many illnesses which would be aggravated by the cold. It would have been rash to make such a long journey just after finishing such a rough one, as I have said, in coming from Soria; nor would Father Provincial allow me to do so. I was reflecting that the prioress of Palencia could easily go, for since everything was in order, there was now nothing to do. While I was thinking about this and very determined not to go, the Lord spoke to me in the following words in which I saw that the license was already given: "Don't pay attention to the cold weather for I am the true warmth. The devil uses all his strength to hinder that foundation; use yours with my help so that it may be realized and do not fail to go in person, for great good will be done."
12. With these words I changed my mind again, for although my human nature sometimes finds these trials distasteful, my determination to suffer for this great God does not lessen. Thus I told Him not to pay any attention to my feelings of weakness when He orders me to do what would please Him, for with His help I would not fail to do it. There was cold weather and snow at the time. That which daunted me most was my lack of health, for when I have my health everything seems easy to me. This lack of health was what very often tired me out on this foundation. The cold was not bad, at least from what I felt, for in truth it seems I felt as much when I was in Toledo. The Lord had well fulfilled His words about this cold.
13. Within a few days they brought me the license, along with letters, from Catalina de Tolosa and her friend Doña Catalina, urging me to hurry, for they feared lest some mishap might occur. At that time the order of the Victorines came there to make a foundation; and the calced Carmelites friars were there for a long time trying to make a foundation; afterward, the Basilians came. That so many of us had come together at the same time was a great obstacle and something to keep in mind, but also something to praise our Lord for because of the great charity of this city. For the city gave them the licenses very willingly even though it was not enjoying its usual prosperity. I have always heard the charity of this city praised, but I had never thought it was as great as it is. Some favored some orders; others favored others. But the archbishop considered all the troubles that could arise and opposed these other foundations thinking that they would be harmful to the orders founded in poverty which would then be unable to survive. Perhaps these very orders influenced him or the devil invented this so as to remove the great blessing that God brings about whenever there are many monasteries, for God has the power to sustain many as well as few.
14. For this reason, those holy women were urging me so much that I would have gone at once were it not for the business I had to attend to. I was considering how much more obligated I was to these women who were so diligent, and not to lose this opportunity through my own fault.
The locution I had heard implied that there would be much opposition. I could not understand from where it would come, for Catalina de Tolosa had already written me assuring us of the house in which she was living for our foundation and that the city was in accord and the archbishop also. I could not understand from whom this opposition to be stirred up by the devils would come, for I never doubted that the words I heard were from God.
15. In short, His Majesty gives more light to superiors, for when I wrote to Father Provincial about the foundation of which I had heard in the locution, he did not forbid me but asked if I had got permission from the archbishop in writing. I wrote about this to Burgos. They answered that they had spoken with him of how they had asked permission from the city and that he was pleased. With this and all the things he had said concerning the foundation, it didn't seem there was any reason to doubt.
16. Father Provincial wanted to accompany us on this foundation. He did so partly because he was unoccupied at the time, since he had finished preaching the Advent series, and had to visit Soria which he had not seen since its founding and which was not much out of the way; and partly because he wanted to look after my health on the journey, for the weather was harsh, and I, old and sick; and they think my life is somewhat important. Certainly this was the providence of God, for the roads were so flooded from the heavy rains that he and his companions were very necessary to guide us along the way and help pull the wagons out of the mire. This was especially so on the trip from Palencia to Burgos, which was a very daring one to make at that time. True, our Lord told me that we could go without harm, that I should not fear, that He would be with us; although I did not tell this then to Father Provincial. But these words consoled me in the great hardships and dangers that we were going through. There was special danger in a river crossing near Burgos called Paso de los Pontones. The rain had been so heavy and had lasted so long that the water flooded the bridge. As a result, the bridge could not be seen nor could we see where to pass, but all was water, and everywhere it was very deep. In sum, it was a great imprudence to cross there, especially with wagons, for just by veering a little from the course all would have been lost. In fact, one of the wagons did get into a dangerous situation.
17. We had hired a guide in an inn who knew that crossing; but, certainly, it was a very dangerous one. And, oh! The inns! There was no possibility of making a full day's journey in one day because of the bad roads. The wagons usually got stuck in the mud and other mules had to be used to help pull the wagons out. The Fathers who came with us had to undergo a great deal because it happened that the muleteers we hired were young and careless. Going with Father Provincial was a great relief because he took care of everything and has such a peaceful disposition that it seems no hardship weighs him down. Thus, what was difficult he made so easy that it seemed to be a small matter -- although not the crossing of the bridge, which frightened us all very much, for if seeing us enter this world of water without a road or a barge made me fear after all the strength our Lord had given me, what must have been the fear of the nuns who accompanied me? We were eight nuns: two who will return with me, and five who are to remain in Burgos, four of them choir Sisters and one lay Sister. I don't think I've yet mentioned Father Provincial's name. His name is Fray Jerónimo Gracián de la Madre de Dios. I have spoken of him at other times. I was making the journey with a severe sore throat, which I caught on my way to Valladolid, along with a fever that had not left me. Eating was very painful. This prevented me from enjoying the good things that happened during the journey. This illness has remained with me until now, the end of June, although considerably less severe, but still very painful. All the nuns were happy on the journey; once the danger was over, they found recreation in talking about it. For those who usually practice obedience as do these nuns, it is a great thing to suffer in obeying.
18. It was through this rough journey and heavy rain that we reached Burgos. Before entering the city, our Father wanted us to go first to visit the holy crucifix and recommend our foundation to the Lord and wait for nightfall, for it was early when we arrived. It was a Friday, January 26, the day after the feast of the Conversion of St. Paul. It had been decided that the foundation be made immediately, and I had brought my letters from Canon Salinas for his relatives and friends strongly urging them to favor this foundation. (Canon Salinas, the one I mentioned in discussing the foundation in Palencia, comes from this city and from an important family. He worked just as hard for this foundation as for that of Palencia.)
19. And favor it, they did. Immediately, the next day, the whole city council came in a body to see me, for they did not regret the permission they had given but rather were glad that I came and wanted me to tell them what they could do for me. If we had any fear, it was of the city. Thus we considered that now everything would go easily. Although no one knew of our coming, we thought of making it known to the archbishop so that the first Mass could be said at once as was done in almost all the other foundations. But because of the very heavy rain that was falling when we reached the house of the good Catalina de Tolosa, we did not do so.
20. That night we rested in the great comfort that this holy woman provided for us. But it proved troublesome for me. She had a large fire so as to dry us out. Although there was a chimney, the fire caused me so much harm that the next day I couldn't raise my head. So, through a window with a grate covered by a veil, I spoke with those who came to visit me. Since it was a day in which I had to attend to business matters, I was very embarrassed.
21. Early that morning, Father Provincial went to seek the blessing of His Excellency, for we thought there would be nothing more to do. He found that the archbishop was very disturbed and angry because I had come without his permission, acting as though he had not ordered me to come or had never discussed anything about the foundation. Thus he spoke to Father Provincial extremely angry at me. When finally he conceded that he had ordered me to come, he said that he meant I should come alone to discuss the matter -- but that I came with so many nuns! God delivered us from the distress it caused him! There was little use telling him that once we had the permission of the city, as he had asked of us, nothing else was left to be done than simply make the foundation and that the Bishop of Palencia had told me (for I had asked him if it would be good that I come without letting the archbishop know) that there was no reason for asking the permission because the archbishop had already said how much he desired the foundation. This is the way the things happened, and they did happen in this way because God wanted the house to be founded. The archbishop himself acknowledged this afterward. If we had openly informed him, he would have told us not to come. He ended the visit with Father Provincial by telling him that if we did not have an income and our own house he would in no way grant the license; we could easily return to where we came from. And the roads were so good and the weather so beautiful!
22. O my Lord, how certain it is that anyone who renders You some service soon pays with a great trial! And what a precious reward a trial is for those who truly love you if we could at once understand its value! But we did not then want this reward because it was making everything impossible. The archbishop made still more demands: that what would be used for income and buying the house could not be taken from what the nuns brought with them. Since a thought like this had never even entered our mind -- especially in these times -- everybody thought that there was no chance whatever for the foundation. But not I, for I was always certain that everything was working for the best, that the devil was setting snares so as to hinder it, and that God would accomplish his designs. Father Provincial returned, nonetheless, very happy, for he was not at that time disturbed. God so provided, and He provided also that Father Provincial would not be annoyed with me for not having obtained the archbishop's permission in writing as he had told me to do.
23. Some of the friends and relatives to whom Canon Salinas had written, as I mentioned, had come to see me, and some of them had come right away. They thought the archbishop should be asked for permission to have Mass in the house so that we would not have to go out into the streets, which were very muddy; and for us to go out discalced was thought to be inappropriate. There was in the house, which had been used for ten years by members of the Society of Jesus when they first came to Burgos, a suitable room that had served as a chapel. With this we thought no obstacle would stand in the way of taking possession there until we had a house. Never were we able to get the archbishop to let us have Mass there, even though two canons went to beg him for it. The most they got from him was that once we had an income, the foundation could be made there until we bought a house. And he said that in order to buy a house we would have to have guarantors who would pay and that we would have to leave the place where we were staying. These guarantors we found at once, for the friends of Canon Salinas offered to do this, and Catalina de Tolosa provided the income for the foundation.
24. It took more than three weeks to decide on the amount of money, how and from where it would come. During this time we could not hear Mass; only very early on feast days. And I, with a fever and very ill. But Catalina de Tolosa did everything so well, because she was so generous and showed so much good will, that she provided us all, in a room where we were secluded, with food for a month, as though she were the mother of each one. Father Provincial and his companions were given lodging in a house of one of his friends, named Doctor Manso, who had been a classmate and was now the canon preacher at the cathedral. Our provincial was very impatient about being detained there so long, but he did not know how he could leave us.
25. Once there was an agreement about the guarantors and the income, the archbishop ordered that the document be given to his administrator, and said that the matter would be taken care of at once. The devil could not leave off tempting the administrator. We thought there would be nothing to cause a delay and that, after we spent almost a month in trying to meet the demands of the archbishop, the administrator would be pleased with what had been done. After examining the document very carefully, the administrator sent me a memorandum saying that the license would not be given until we had a house of our own and that the archbishop did not want the foundation to be made in the house in which we were staying because it was damp and there was too much noise in the street. And with regard to the guarantees made on the property, I don't know what complications and other things he brought up, as though we were just then beginning the whole matter. And he said that he would have no more to say about this, and that the house must satisfy the archbishop.
26. When Father Provincial saw this, he was very upset as were all the nuns. In order to buy a site for a monastery much time is obviously required, and he was annoyed at seeing us go out for Mass. Even though the church was not far and we heard the Mass in a chapel without anyone seeing us, this situation was a very great hardship for His Reverence and us. By that time, I think, he had made up his mind that we should go back. I could not bear the thought of this when I remembered that our Lord told me that as His instrument I should try to make the foundation, and I was so certain that it would be made that almost nothing caused me distress. My only distress was for Father Provincial. Since I didn't know how much his friends were going to help us, as I shall mention later, I was very sorry that he had come with us. While I was experiencing this affliction (and my companions were also very afflicted, but I didn't mind theirs as much as I did Father Provincial's), but not engaged in prayer itself, our Lord spoke these words to me: "Now Teresa, hold fast." With these words, I tried with more spirit to get Father Provincial to leave and let us remain (and His Majesty must have given him the same spirit), for Lent was approaching and he had to go to preach.
27. He and his friends gave orders that some rooms in the hospital of the Conception be given to us, for the Blessed Sacrament was reserved there and Mass was said each day. This made the provincial somewhat satisfied. But there was no small struggle in getting this, for one of the rooms, which was a good one, had been rented by a widow of this city, and she did not want to let us use it even though she was not going to move there for another half year. It also upset her that one of the rooms they had given us on the top floor, which had only the bare tiles of the roof for a ceiling, had an entrance to her room. She was not satisfied with having the key to the lock on the outside but she also nailed up the entrance from the inside. Furthermore, the hospital confraternity was afraid that we were going to take over the hospital, which was something absurd, but God wanted us to merit more. They made Father Provincial and me promise before a notary that if they told us to leave we would have to do so at once. It was this promise that was the most difficult thing for me to do, for I feared the widow, who was rich and had relatives, that she would make us leave on one of her whims. But Father Provincial, who was more circumspect, wanted us to do all they asked so that we could go there immediately.
28. They gave us no more than two rooms and a kitchen. But a great servant of God, named Hernando de Matanza, was in charge of the hospital and gave us two other rooms for a parlor. He showed us great charity, and he does so to all, for he does much for the poor. Francisco de Cuevas, who is the postmaster of this city, also showed us great charity, for he was much involved with this hospital. He has always helped us when there was need.
29. I have mentioned the names of those who were our first benefactors because it is right that the nuns living now, and those who are to come after, remember them in their prayers. The founding benefactors should be remembered even more. Although at first it was not my intention to count Catalina de Tolosa among these latter, nor did it enter my mind, she has merited by her good life in the service of our Lord that He so ordain things that the title of founding benefactoress cannot be denied her. Apart from her paying for the house, for we would have had no means of doing so, she bore the indescribable cost of all these rebuffs of the archbishop. Her deepest affliction was the thought that the foundation might not be made, and she never tired of doing good for us.
30. This hospital was very far from her house. She visited us almost every day with great charity and sent us all that we needed. Because of this, the people never stopped making critical comments to her, so that if it were not for her courage, these would have been enough to make her give up the whole thing. To see what she was suffering caused me great pain. Even though she hid it most of the time, at other times she could not conceal it, especially when these comments affected her conscience. She is so conscientious that, however great were the occasions of sin that some persons provided for her, I never heard her speak a word that was offensive to God. They told her that she was on her way to hell and asked how she could do what she was doing since she had children. Everything she did was with the advice of learned men. Even if she would have wanted to do otherwise, I would not have consented for anything in the world to her doing something she should not do, even if it would have meant my giving up a thousand monasteries, to say nothing of just one. But since the business matters concerning the foundation were kept secret, I am not surprised at what was in the minds of the people. She answered with prudence, for she has a great deal of it, and suffered the remarks in such a way that it truly seemed God was teaching her and gave her the ability to please some and bear with others. And He gave her the courage to put up with everything. How much more courage for doing great things do the servants of God have than do those of high nobility if they are not His servants; although she, being of noble descent, is not without much nobility in her background.
31. Well to return to what I was dealing with, once Father Provincial had us in a place where we could hear Mass and observe enclosure, he had the heart to go to Valladolid where he was to preach. Yet he was distressed at not seeing in the archbishop any hopeful sign that the license would be granted. Although I always insisted that it would be given, he could not believe this. And, certainly, there were many reasons for his not believing this which need not be mentioned here. If he had little hope, his friends had less, and they made him more discouraged.
I was more relieved to see him gone because, as I have said, the greatest suffering I had was to see his. He left us the instructions to find a house that we could own, which was something very difficult because until then not even one house was found that was for sale. Our friends, especially those of Father Provincial's, were given greater charge over us, and all agreed not to speak a word to the archbishop until we had a house. The archbishop always said that he desired this foundation more than anyone. And I believe it, because he is such a good Christian that he wouldn't speak anything but the truth; but in his deeds it didn't appear that he desired this since he demanded things that seemed impossible for us to comply with. This was the devil's scheme to prevent the foundation. But, O Lord, how obvious it is that You are powerful, for the very scheme the devil used to prevent it, You used to do something better. May You be blessed forever.
32. From the vigil of St. Matthias, when we began living in the hospital, until the vigil of St. Joseph we were conferring about this and that house. There were so many obstacles that we could not buy any of those that were for sale. I was told of one house owned by a gentleman, which had been up for sale for many days, and even though so many religious were looking for a house, God was pleased that none of them found it suitable. Now, they are all surprised, and some really sorry about this. Two persons had spoken to me about the house. But there were so many who spoke badly of it, that I paid no attention to it, thinking it would be unsuitable.
33. One day I was speaking with Doctor Aguiar, who I said was a friend of our Father Provincial's. He was looking very carefully for a house for us. He said that he had looked at some but that nothing appropriate could be found in the whole city and that it didn't seem possible to find any, as others were telling me. I then remembered the one I mentioned that we had disregarded. I thought, even though it's as bad as they say we can take care of our present need and later on sell it. I told Doctor Aguiar about it and asked him if he would do me the favor of looking at it.
34. To him, this didn't seem to be a bad plan. He had not seen the house, and even though it was a stormy and rough day, he wanted to go there at once. There was an occupant in it who had little interest in its being sold and did not want to show it to him, but its location and the little he could see pleased him greatly, and thus we decided to try to buy it. The gentleman who owned it was not here but the power to sell it had been given to a priest, a servant of God whom His Majesty inspired with a desire to sell it to us and deal with us very honestly.
35. It was arranged that I go to see it. It pleased me to such an extreme that if they had asked for twice as much as they did, it would have seemed cheap to me. I am not exaggerating, because two years before they were offering the owner that much, and he did not want to sell it. The next day a priest and Doctor Aguiar went there, and when the latter learned of the amount of money that would be acceptable, he wanted to sign the contract at once. I had informed some of my friends, and they had told me that if I gave this amount I was giving five hundred ducats too much. I told Doctor Aguiar, but he thought the price was cheap if I gave what was asked for. I was of the same mind. I myself would not have hesitated because it seemed to me like a gift, but since the money belonged to the order, I had some scruple. We met about this before Mass on the vigil of the feast of our glorious Father St. Joseph. I told them that after Mass we should meet again and come to a decision.
36. Doctor Aguiar is a very intelligent man and saw clearly that if our desire were made public we would either have to pay much more for the house or not buy it. Thus he was very careful and made the priest promise to come back there after Mass. We nuns went to recommend the matter to God, who said to me, "Do you hesitate over money?" letting me know that the house was suitable for us. The Sisters had prayed very much to St. Joseph that they might have a house by this feastday, and although there was no thought of having it so soon, he heard their prayers. Everyone urged me to conclude the contract. And thus it was done, for Doctor Aguiar found a notary at the door, which seemed ordained by the Lord, and came with him and a witness and told me it was opportune to sign the contract. Having closed the door of the room so that nothing would be known (for this was Doctor Aguiar's fear), we concluded the sale, in accord with all the legal demands, on the vigil of the glorious St. Joseph, as I have said. It came about through the careful diligence and intelligence of this good friend.
37. No one thought the house would be sold for so little. Thus, as the news spread, the buyers began to appear and say that the priest who sold it gave it away practically and that the sale should be nullified because of the great fraud. The good priest suffered very much. They immediately informed the owners, a gentleman, as I said, and his wife, both from the nobility. They were so happy that their house was being made into a monastery that they approved, although there was nothing else they could now do. Immediately, the next day, the deed was drawn up, and a third of the price was paid. Everything was done according to the requests of the priest. Although some things in the agreement were onerous to us, we accepted everything for his sake.
38. It may seem pointless that I spent so much time in telling about the buying of this house, but indeed those who considered the things in detail thought it was no less than a miracle, both in the price, which made the house seem like a gift, and in the fact that many from religious orders were so blinded that after looking at it did not want to buy it, as though it had never been in Burgos. Those who saw it were amazed and blamed the religious and called them fools. And a monastery of nuns (even two monasteries -- one had been recently founded; the other had moved here from elsewhere after their former house had burned down) had looked at it a little while ago. So too did a wealthy person who is trying to found a monastery. They all let it go, and now they are very sorry.
39. Such was the outcry in the city that we saw clearly how right the good Doctor Aguiar was to keep the whole matter secret and in being so diligent about this. Indeed, we can say that, after God, it was he who gave us the house. Good intelligence is a great help in everything. And since he has so much, God moved him and brought this work to completion through him. For more than a month he helped and advised us on how to adapt the house well and with little cost. It seemed as though our Lord had kept it for Himself, for almost everything seemed to be already done. Indeed, as soon as I saw it and how everything was as though made to order for us and done so quickly, it seemed like a dream. By bringing us to such a paradise, our Lord repaid us generously for what we had suffered. Because of the garden, the view, and the water, the property is nothing else but that. May He be blessed forever, amen.
40. The archbishop learned of it immediately and rejoiced in our success, thinking that his obstinacy had been the reason, and he was very right. I wrote to him that I was happy he was pleased and that I would hurry to adapt the house so that he could give us his final permission. Once I told him this, I made haste to move in because I was told that they wanted to keep us where we were until the deed or I don't know what was signed. Thus we moved into one room even though an occupant was still living in the house, for there was also some trouble in getting rid of him. They told me that the archbishop was very angry about our moving in. I tried to appease him as much as I could, for, because he is good, even though he does get angry, he soon gets over it. He was also angry when he learned that we had the grates and the turn, for he thought that I wanted to go ahead at all costs. I wrote to him that this was not the case, but that in a house for persons living a life of recollection these are customary, that I hadn't even dared to put up a cross so as not to appear to be going ahead before having permission, and this was true. Notwithstanding all the good will I showed, there was no way of getting him to grant the license.
41. He came to see the house and was very pleased with it and showed us much kindness but did not give us the permission, although he offered more hope. There was still I don't know what contracts to be made with Catalina de Tolosa. Everyone was very afraid that he would not give it. But Doctor Manso, whom I mentioned, as the other friend of Father Provincial's, was too good a friend of the archbishop's to be waiting for the proper time before reminding him and urging him. It was very distressing to Doctor Manso to see us going about as we were. For even though there was a chapel in this house, which was never used except for saying Mass for the owners, the archbishop never allowed Mass to be said for us in the house. On feastdays and Sundays we had to go out to a church in order to hear Mass. Fortunately it was nearby, although between the time we moved and the time the foundation was made, a month more or less passed by. All the learned men said there was sufficient reason for allowing Mass in the chapel. The archbishop who is a very learned man understood this too. So it seems there is no other explanation than that our Lord wanted us to suffer. Although I bore it better, there was a nun who in seeing herself out on the street trembled from the distress she felt.
42. In drawing up the contracts there was no little trouble, because one minute they were satisfied with the guarantors, the next minute they wanted the money; and they made many other vexing demands. In this, the archbishop was not so much to blame but one administrator who was very hostile to us. If in God's providence it had not been necessary for this administrator to go on a trip and another take his place, it seems we would never have obtained the license. Oh, what Catalina de Tolosa had to suffer in all this is impossible to say! She bore everything with a patience that amazed me, and she did not tire of providing for us. She gave all the furnishings we needed to set up the house, such as beds and many other things, for she had a well supplied house. It seemed that we were lacking no necessity, even if she lacked it in her own house. Other founding benefactors of our monasteries have given much more in property and wealth, but for none of them was the cost as much as one-tenth of what she went through. And if she had had no children, she would have given all that she could. She desired so much to see the work completed that everything she did toward this end seemed to her little.
43. Seeing so much delay, I wrote to the Bishop of Palencia begging him to write again to the archbishop. The bishop was disgusted with him, for everything the archbishop did to us the bishop took as done to him. And what amazed us was that the archbishop never thought he was offensive to us in anything. I begged the bishop to write again to the archbishop saying that since we had the house and had done what he had wanted that he should bring the matter to a close. The bishop sent me an open letter for the archbishop written in such a way that if I had given it to him we would have ruined everything. Thus Doctor Manso, my confessor and adviser, did not want me to give it to him. Although it was very courteous, it spoke some truths that, given the temperament of the archbishop, were enough to annoy him, for he was already annoyed by some of the messages the bishop had sent to him, and they were close friends. The bishop used to tell me that just as through the death of our Lord enemies had become friends so though me friends had become enemies. I told him that from this he could see what I was. I had taken special care, in my opinion, so that they would not become angry with each other.
44. I begged the bishop again, with the best reasons I could think of, that he write another very friendly letter to the archbishop and remind him of the service the monastery would render to God. He did what I asked him, which was no trifle. But since he saw that writing the letter was for the service of God and a favor to me, which he has always been ready to grant, he finally forced himself. He wrote to me afterward that of all the things he had done for the order nothing compared with his having had to write this letter. In short, this letter was so effective, together with the diligence of Doctor Manso, that the archbishop gave us the license. He sent it with the good Hernando de Matanza, who arrived with no little joy. On this day the Sisters had been more distressed than ever, and the good Catalina de Tolosa so much so that she could not be consoled. It seems that the Lord at the time when he was about to give us the joy wanted to afflict us more. Even I, who had not been lacking in confidence, was lacking in it the night before. May His name be blessed without end and praised forever and ever, amen.
45. The archbishop gave Doctor Manso permission to say the first Mass the next day and to reserve the Blessed Sacrament. And the Father Prior of San Pablo, who belongs to the Dominican order (to which our order owes so much as well as to the Society of Jesus), said the high Mass with much solemnity provided by musicians who came unrequested with their wind instruments.
All our friends were very pleased and so too was almost the whole city, for they had felt very sorry to see us in such a situation. They were so critical of what the archbishop was doing that I sometimes felt more sorry at what I heard people were saying about him than I was about what we ourselves were going through. The joy of the good Catalina de Tolosa and of the Sisters was so great that it inspired me with devotion and I said to God: "Lord, what do these your servants seek other than to serve you and see themselves enclosed for You in a place they will never leave?"
46. No one but those who experience it will believe the joy that is felt in these foundations once we are enclosed where no secular person can enter, for however much we love them it is not enough to take away this great consolation in finding ourselves alone. It seems to me comparable to taking many fish from the river with a net; they cannot live until they are in the water again. So it is with souls accustomed to living in the running streams of their Spouse. When taken out of them and caught up in the net of worldly things, they do not truly live until they find themselves back in those waters. This I always observed in each of these Sisters; this I know from my own experience. Nuns who see in themselves the desire to go out among seculars and converse with them a great deal should fear that they have not discovered the living water of which the Lord spoke to the Samaritan woman and that their Spouse has hid it from them, and rightly so since they are not satisfied in being with Him. I am afraid that this latter stems from two causes: either they did not embrace the religious state for Him alone; or, after having embraced it, they do not recognize the great favor God has granted them in choosing them for Himself and freeing them from being subject to a man who is often the death of them and who could also be, God forbid, the death of their souls.
47. Oh, my Spouse, true God and true man! Should this favor be taken so lightly? Let us praise Him, my Sisters, because He has granted it to us and let us not tire of praising so great a King and Lord, who has prepared for us a kingdom without end in exchange for some little troubles which will end tomorrow and which come wrapped in a thousand joys. May He be blessed forever, amen, amen.
48. A few days after the house was founded, it seemed to Father Provincial and me that in the endowment Catalina de Tolosa had provided for this house there were certain difficulties that could have given rise to a lawsuit and cause her some worry. And we wanted more to trust in God than to be the occasion for giving her any suffering. For this and some other reasons, with the permission of Father Provincial, we nullified in the presence of a notary the contracts concerning the money she had given us and returned all the documents. This was done in great secrecy so that the archbishop wouldn't know of it, for he would have been hurt. But doing this also hurt the house. When it is known that a monastery is founded in poverty, there is nothing to fear because everyone helps. But when people think it has an income, to be without one is dangerous and the monastery will be left temporarily without means. Catalina de Tolosa has provided for a remedy that will become possible after her death. She has arranged that her two daughters, who were to make profession in our monastery of Palencia that year, would transfer to this house their inheritance that would have been promised to Palencia at their profession. And to another daughter, who desired to receive the habit here, she has left the family estate which amounts to as much as the income she wanted to provide. The only drawback is that these goods cannot be used at once, but I have always held that we will not be in want. The Lord who provides that alms be given to our other monasteries founded in poverty will awaken some to give them here, or will provide the means by which nuns can support themselves. Since no monastery had been founded under such conditions, I sometimes begged the Lord that since He had desired that this foundation be made He ordain that it be helped and have what is necessary, and I had no desire to leave here until I saw whether someone wanting to be a nun would enter.
49. While I was thinking about this one day after Communion, the Lord said to me: "Why do you doubt? Everything is now finished; you are free to go." He thereby let me know that they would not lack what was necessary. These words so impressed me that I had no more worry than I would have if I had left the nuns with a very good income. I immediately began to plan my departure, for it seemed to me I was no longer doing anything else here than enjoy myself in this house, for it suited me perfectly, and I could have been a greater help, although with much more hardship, in other monasteries.
The archbishop and the Bishop of Palencia remained good friends. Soon the archbishop began to show us much kindness and gave the habit to Catalina de Tolosa's daughter and to another nun who within a short time entered here. Up to the present, there are some persons who have been looking after us. Nor will our Lord allow his brides to suffer if they serve Him as they are obliged. May His Majesty give them the grace for this through His great mercy and goodness.
