1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I was greatly relieved to learn from your letter that matters are quite different from what had been believed here. May God be blessed for everything, for Mother Prioress surprised me and I would have been displeased if she had done anything against your will. I more or less understand what moved the one who told us into thinking she was telling the truth. For me it was really difficult to believe and that is why I wrote to ask you what you had observed. Mother Prioress always tells me of how indebted she is to you, of the comfort you are to her, and the help you give her in everything.
2. As for the price of the house, I am not unhappy nor should you be. In exchange for a house being in a good locality, I never mind giving a third more than what it is worth -- and I've even ended up giving a half more. It is so important to have a monastery well located that it would be a mistake to look at the price. Considering the water and the view, I would elsewhere have very gladly paid much more than what the house cost. Glory to God that you were so successful.
3. With regard to the vicar general, you should feel no regrets, for, as you say, that is not a priority. The monastery was founded with a license from the council of the Order of Knights and a mandate from the king. If the king had not given a mandate -- he does me a great favor in this respect because of the good reputation these monasteries have -- we may have experienced what happened to the foundress of Beas. For twelve years she sought authorization to make a foundation for another religious order, not knowing about this one, and without succeeding. Nor after a monastery is founded, can it be closed down for light reasons; there is nothing to fear in this regard. Now, I believe, they will send you all the documents, except the one I mention in the letter to Señor Miguel Caja, but I will send that one to you soon. And if I do not send it, the reason will be that the bishop, as he says in a letter that arrived today, will be going there. He will go with the readiness to accept the foundation at once, for he is a good gentleman and has relatives and friends who will help me in every way, and so there is no reason to hesitate.
4. The mistake was in not letting me know immediately, for since I had so often written that I would not make the foundation without the license of the ordinary, I certainly thought that it had been given, for I would not have left without attending to this matter. Since I have mentioned here that they have an income of seven hundred ducats (as Mother Prioress has written me and also written to the bishop), the figure must be true. If a nun is received with a small dowry, it may be used to bring the income to the correct amount, if that is lacking. You should not feel sorry, for our Lord wants us to suffer something; in fact this foundation at first made me suspicious because it came about so peacefully. All the foundations, which our Lord will make great use of, afflict the devil and so there is always something for us to suffer. I rejoiced over the improved health of our sister and señora. Please God it will last for many years, and may he watch over you and Señora Doña Constanza. I kiss the hands of both your honors many times.
Today is Septuagesima Sunday.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
