1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with you, my daughter. The mail carrier is leaving tomorrow, but because I didn't have any good news to tell you I wasn't going to write. Tonight, a little before we closed the door, they sent word to me that the man living in the house has now agreed to allow us to come the day after tomorrow, the feast of Saints Philip and James, which makes me think that the Lord is beginning to soften our trials.
2. Send this to Mother Prioress in Medina whenever you can for she will be feeling distressed over a letter I wrote to her, even though I did anything but exaggerate our trials. You should know that with the exception of the foundation of St. Joseph's everything has been a trifle in comparison with what I have suffered here. When you learn the details, you will see what I mean when I say that only through God's mercy will things turn out well for us. In fact we can say they already have. The injustices that are the common practice in this area, the deception and the duplicity are a strange thing. I tell you, there is every reason for the reputation this region has. May the Lord be blessed who draws good from everything. On seeing so many instances of this, I have been experiencing a strange joy. If my brother had not been here, we wouldn't have been able to do anything at all.
3. He has suffered very much and most willingly spent his money and supported us in everything, which makes us praise God. How right these sisters are to love him, for they received no help from others, but only more trouble. Now he is in hiding on our account, and it was lucky that he wasn't put in the prison here which is like a hell; and everything is done without justice, for they want us to pay what we do not owe and take him as surety. The only way to end this is to have recourse to Madrid, for there is no other way out, but he has been pleased to suffer something for God.
4. He is in the Carmelite monastery with our padre, on whom trials are falling like hail. Well, I have a hard time trying to hide our own from him, for these are what have tormented him most, and rightly so.
5. That you may know what I am referring to, remember the things I wrote concerning the lies which that nun who left told about us. Well, that was nothing in comparison with what she then accused us of at a most inopportune time and without any reason -- you will find out some day. Those to whom she told so much came here without warning -- and more than once -- and without cause. The source of all this became clear to us through the person who was called in. As for myself, I tell you that God granted me such a favor that I was immersed in delight. My joy surpassed my awareness of the great harm that could come to all our houses. It is a wonderful thing to have a secure conscience and to be free.
6. Her companion entered another monastery. And yesterday it was confirmed to me that this companion went out of her mind, and for no other reason than that she left here. See how great are the judgments of God, who stands up for the truth; and now it is clear that the accusations were all nonsense. And nonsense also was what she said of us, that we tied the hands and feet of the nuns and flogged them -- would to God all the accusations had been of that sort. On top of this very serious lie, she said a thousand other things, which made me see clearly that the Lord wanted to try us with affliction so as to bring all to a happy conclusion, as he did. Consequently, don't be sad. Rather I hope we will be able to leave soon, once the nuns have moved to their new house. The Franciscans have shown no more signs of life, and if they do after the nuns have taken possession of the house, it won't matter.
7. The nuns here are great souls, and this prioress has a courage that has amazed me -- much more courage than I have. It seems to me that my presence here has been a help to them, for the blows fall on me. She is very intelligent. I tell you that in my opinion she is perfect for Andalusia. And how necessary it was to choose well the nuns who were brought here.
I am well, although at first my health had not been good. This syrup is reinvigorating me. Our padre is ailing, but without a fever. He doesn't know that I am writing to you. Pray for him, and that God will bring us through all these affairs happily. Yes, I believe he will. Oh, what a year I've gone through here!
8. Let's come now to your counsels. With regard to the first, the title "Don" is given in the Indies to all those who have vassals. But when my nephews arrived here, I asked their father not to call them by that title, and I gave my reasons. He complied and they were calm and unassuming about it. When Juan de Ovalle and my sister came, my reasons were insufficient. (I don't know whether or not they were trying to defend the title of their own son.) Since my brother was not here, for he was absent a long while, and I was not with them when he arrived back, they had so many reasons in favor that all mine proved of little use. True, in Avila nothing else matters but this title, which is a shame. And certainly, the matter touches me deeply because of what it will do to their reputation; as for mine I don't think I ever think about it, nor should it matter to you, for next to the other things they say about me, this is nothing. Out of love for you I will speak to their father again, but I don't think there is any way of changing the mind of their uncle and aunt who have become accustomed to it. I am very embarrassed every time I hear the title used.
9. As for Teresa's letter to Padilla, I don't believe she wrote to anyone except to the prioress of Medina and to you so as to bring joy to the two of you. I believe that one time she did write to him two or three words. You are convinced that I am blinded by her and my brother, and nothing can make you get this out of your head. Certainly I should be, were I different from what I am. But consider that despite all I owe him, I am happy that he was forced into hiding because he is prevented from coming here often. And it is true that he is something of a bother, although when I tell him to go because our padre or someone else is coming, he is as obliging as an angel. Not that I fail to love him dearly, for I do love him, but I would like to be alone. All of this is so, whatever others may think -- which matters little.
10. Padilla must have been joking in saying that he was visitator. I know him well. Nonetheless, he's been a great help and we owe him much. No one is without faults -- what do you want! I am highly pleased that Doña María is happy with that permission. Give her my best regards, for since it is very late I am not writing to her, and tell her I am sorry that the duchess is not with her. I see that the Lord wants her to have him alone as her company and consolation.
11. I know nothing more about Avila than what you write me. May God be with you. My regards to Casilda and all the sisters and especially to my Padre Fray Domingo. I wished very much that he would have delayed his trip to Avila until I got there; but since the Lord wills that everything be a cross, so be it. Do not neglect to write me. Don't send away that nun you say is so good. Or, maybe she would want to come here, for I would like to bring some nuns down here, if I could. Take note -- in my opinion, there is no reason to be troubled, for I believe that everything will go well.
12. Don't forget to send this to Mother Prioress in Medina and have her send it to the prioress in Salamanca, and let it be for all three of you. May God make you saints. I confess that the people in this area are not for me and that I desire to be in the land of promise, if God wills. Although if I knew I would serve him better here, I would gladly remain; although the sinful abominations that go on here are a painful affliction. You would be frightened by them. May the Lord provide a remedy.
Today is White Sunday. Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
13. Regards to my María de la Cruz and the subprioress. Read this to my María de la Cruz. Have all your nuns pray for us.
