For Mother Prioress María de San José, Seville.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. Oh, how I would like to write a long letter, but since I have other letters to write, I don't have time. I told Padre Fray Gregorio to write a long letter about the whole trip. The fact is that there are not many things to report because we journeyed very well; it wasn't hot, and we arrived in good health, glory to God, the second day after Pentecost. I found Mother Prioress's condition improved, although she is not completely well. Take great care to pray for her. I've spent some enjoyable moments with her. I have kept very much in mind the change that you must still make. Please God, you will not be lacking anything.
2. For charity's sake, I beg you to write me through every means you can so that I may always know how you all are. Don't fail to write by way of Toledo, for I will inform the prioress to send the letters in due time, and perhaps I may have to stay in Toledo for a few days, for I fear that this business with Doña Luisa will demand much effort before being concluded. Pray for this. My regards to Mother Subprioress and the other sisters. Take good care of San Gabriel for me, for she was beside herself the day I left. Many regards to Garciálvarez and tell us about the lawsuit and everything else, and give us even more news about our padre if he has arrived. I am writing him with much insistence that he not allow anyone to eat in the monastery parlor -- see that you don't start something -- except for himself since he is in such need, and if this can be done without it becoming known. And even if it becomes known, there is a difference between a superior and a subject, and his health is so important to us that whatever we can do amounts to little. Mother Prioress will send some money with Padre Fray Gregorio for this and for any other need that may arise, for she is fond of him and so does this gladly. And it would be good for him to know about this, for I tell you that since you receive little in alms it could happen that you would be depriving yourselves of food so as to give it to others. I desire very much that the sisters not be troubled about anything; that they serve our Lord generously. May it please His Majesty that this be so, as I beg of him.
3. Tell Sister San Francisco to be a good historian of all that happens concerning the friars. Since I've just come from the house down there, this house now strikes me as even worse. These sisters here suffer many hardships. Teresa was a little sad on the journey, especially the first day. She said it was caused by having to leave the sisters behind. On arriving here, she felt as though she had been living with these sisters all her life. She was so happy she could hardly eat supper the day we arrived. I was delighted because I believe her affection for them is deeply rooted. I will write again through Padre Fray Gregorio. I have nothing more to say now other than ask the Lord to watch over you and make you holy so that all the nuns will be so likewise, amen.
Today is the Friday after Pentecost.
4. Give this enclosed letter to our padre personally, and if he is not there, do not send it to him unless through a very trustworthy person, which is important.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
Teresa is not writing to you because she is busy. She says she is prioress and sends you her best regards.
