1. May Jesus be with your ladyship. The messenger is in such a hurry that I don't know how I'm going to manage sending you even these few lines, although my love for you is helping me find the time. Oh, my lady, how often I think of you and of your trials, and so I take care in praying to our Lord for you. May it please His Majesty to give health quickly to those lords so that I will not feel so far away from you, for if I knew you were in Toledo, I think I'd be content. I am well, glory be to God. I will go from here to Valladolid after the feast of St. Peter.
2. Remember, since I entrusted my soul to you, that you send it to me by messenger as quickly as you can, but not without a letter from that holy man, so that we may know his opinion, as we agreed in our conversation together. I'm afraid that when the presentado Fray Domingo comes, for they say he is coming this summer, I'll be caught red-handed. For love of our Lord, after that saint has seen it, send it to me, for there will be time for us to see it together when I return to Toledo. Don't worry about having Salazar see it, unless an exceptional opportunity arises, for it's more important that you send it back to me.
3. From your monastery they write me that everything is going very well and that they are making progress, and I believe it. Everyone here thinks that those sisters are so very fortunate in having such a confessor -- for they know him. They marvel and so do I at the manner in which the Lord brought him there. I think the Lord did so for the benefit of souls in that place, for they say he does much good. And this he has done wherever he has been. Surely, he is a man of God. Everyone here esteems the house in Malagón highly, and the friars are very happy. May the Lord bring me back there with you.
4. I find that the sisters here have made exceptional progress. All of them kiss your hands, and I, those of both Señor Don Juan and my ladies, for I have no time to write more. Tomorrow is the feast of St. John; we will pray fervently to him for our foundress and patroness, and for our patron.
Your ladyship's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
Unless you want them to pass through the superior, address your letters, and what I entrusted to you, here.
