For Mother María de San José, Carmelite and prioress of St. Joseph's in Seville.
1. May Jesus be with your reverence, my daughter. I tell you that if you experience some sadness over my absence, mine is greater. May the Lord make use of the many trials and the pain it cost me to leave daughters who are so dear to me. I hope that you are all well; I am in good health, glory be to God.
2. You will have already received the letters that the muleteer brought. This one will be short. I thought I would be here for some days yet, but since Sunday is the feast of St. John the Baptist, I have advanced the day of my departure, and so I have little time. Since Padre Fray Gregorio will be my messenger, I am not bothered by this.
3. I am worried that you will be pressed this year into paying the annuity, for by next year the Lord will have provided someone to pay it for you. Santángel has a sister whom Mother Prioress here praises highly and would prefer her to the one who entered. She says a dowry of 300 ducats will be given for the one who has entered (who will have completed a year in August), and that the other sister will give the same amount, with which you would be able to pay the annuity for this year. It is a small amount. But if what they say about her is true, she deserves to be accepted for nothing, so much the more because she is from this region. Speak about this to our padre, and if there is no other solution, you could accept her. The trouble is that she is only fourteen years old; for this reason I say she shouldn't be accepted unless nothing else can be done. Think about it.
4. It seems to me for many reasons that it would be good if our padre gave orders that Beatriz make her profession at once. One reason is that it would put an end to her temptations. Give my regards to her and to her mother and to all whom you see and to everyone and to Mother Subprioress and all the sisters, especially my nurse. May God watch over you for me, my daughter, and make you very holy, amen.
5. My brother wrote to all of you the other day and commends himself much to your prayers. He is more measured than Teresa, who cannot manage to love any others as much as she loves all of you. Because Mother Prioress (with whom I am definitely delighted) will be writing and Fray Gregorio will tell you the news, I'll say no more. I believe I'll be in Toledo for some days. Write to me there.
Yesterday was the feast of the Most Holy Trinity.
6. Try to get a letter from our padre for me or send a lot of news about him, for I haven't received any word about him. May God make you all saints.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
7. With regard to the nun, I have found out more; for the time being she shouldn't be considered.
