1. ... that your paternity is in that place. Today the prior of Carmona passed by with another presentado. (Padre Fray Gregorio will tell you about some of the things we had to undergo.) He told me that only Cota had retired to the Carmelite monastery and that the prosecutor of the royal council had taken over his case and that the council was dealing with it. This seems to me a bland way to be dealing with the preposterous things they did, although this padre well knows that they were in the wrong. He says he has stated this repeatedly and that he is going to the nuncio to tell him to punish those who were guilty and not make everyone pay. And he is going to petition that you not be the visitator because none of them will obey you and that the nuncio choose someone else.
2. I was thinking whether it might be good if you on your own made this request of both the nuncio and the king, pointing out how those friars have this stubborn notion and feel so much hostility toward you that your visitation could hardly bear fruit ... and would be to the satisfaction of everyone. And if they do not grant this request, it would be for me at least a comfort to know that you did what you could to free yourself of the obligation. The thought that they will have to obey you again and then once more start agitating against you is for me worse than death. Think about it, mi padre; when there is nothing else you can do, then proceed under obedience and the Lord will take over.
3. They say that they can take care of their province, that Tostado will take charge. May the Lord bring this about, for it would be good to find some means to deal with so hopeless a people, now that you have put things in order. Oh, Jesus, how hard it is to be far away from all the things happening there. I assure you that for me it is a real cross.
4. I am going to Toledo and I am thinking of staying there until Doña Luisa provides what is necessary for this house. Now she is saying that she will send a workman here, but shows no enthusiasm about it.
I am well ...
