For Mother Prioress in Seville, María de San José.
1. May Jesus be with your reverence. I assure you that I feel the same loneliness for you that you feel for me. After I wrote the enclosed letter, I received yours. It brought me so much joy that I was deeply touched. And your requests for pardon have pleased me. On the condition that you love me as much as I love you, I pardon you for what you have done or will do. My only complaint now is about how little you wanted to be with me. But I see well that you are not at fault, and this I told Mother Prioress in Malagón. It was only that the Lord, who willed that I have so many trials in Seville, ordained that I be deprived of your company, which gave me relief. Certainly, as an exchange, so that you and the sisters were able to have some peace, I consider them worthwhile, and I would even bear many more for this purpose. And believe me, I love you much; and that since I see in you this same affection, the rest is a trifle to which you should pay no attention. But while I was down there, since I underwent the trials along with your aloofness -- while I treated you like a cherished daughter -- it was a great suffering not to find in you the same simplicity and love. But certainly with this letter of yours everything is forgotten, and my affection for you is such that I have to temper its excess by recalling the past.
2. I rejoiced infinitely in learning how well everything was done. The terms of the contract must be settled before going ahead, even though they may not offer much security for the future, for it's a hard thing to have a lawsuit on one's hands, especially in the beginning. Let's try to repay quickly the money advanced by my brother -- I mean the amount for the excise when the house was purchased. I am as concerned about the house in Seville as when I was there, and even more so, or at least as much. Oh, how happy your letters made him! He never stops speaking about your discretion. The letters arrived in good condition, but whenever you try to improve your handwriting it gets worse. Since he and Teresa are writing, I am not going to say anything about them. I have written to Father Prior of Las Cuevas, and today I must write to Malagón on business and to our padre, and so I don't expect to be able to write in answer to the sisters, especially since there has been no letup of visitors.
3. Because of his charity, I readily believe what you tell me about the good Garciálvarez. Give him my best regards. The letter from Father Prior made me happy. My friends do me a great favor by the way they are treating all of you. Try to get on well with them and when the opportunity arises do something, with moderation, for Mariano and Fray Antonio, for I wouldn't want you to lose their favor. May God forgive them, for the commotion that was caused concerning the other friars could have been avoided and matters resolved in another way. Our padre is very distressed. He is well, and the nuncio thought it a good thing that he had not returned down there.
4. You cannot say that I do not write you frequently. May you do the same, for I greatly enjoy your letters. I didn't know anything about what was going on there, for our padre's letters are very brief; he surely must be unable to do otherwise. May God be with you and make you very holy. Gabriela writes me that she is not well -- for I read her letter after I had written a good part of this one. She says she is suffering from pains in the stomach. Please God it is nothing serious. I don't remember whom I entrusted your care to. Let the subprioress take on this task, and see that you obey her and take care of your health for love of me. It would be infinitely painful to me were you to lose your health. May it please the Lord to grant you good health, as I beg him. My regards to Beatriz's mother and to Delgado. The prioress tells me to send her regards to you. All the sisters are happy about how well things are going for you. May this always be so.
I believe I've already mentioned that today is the feast of the Visitation.
5. The priest came while I was attending Mass, and after giving his greetings, he went away. I spoke with him, and if he had stayed I would have shown him some courtesy, but he was in the company of others and so had to continue on his journey.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
6. Gabriela also writes and says that you keep the house very neat. I would love to see it now. I have not been able to look at whom the letters were from until now. I was glad to receive the one from our good padre, Garciálvarez. I will gladly write to him, and those daughters of mine will pardon me if I neglect them so as to fulfill my obligation toward their good benefactor.
