1. Jesus be with your reverence. You cannot say that I do not write to you often. This letter may perhaps reach you before the one I wrote three or four days ago, I believe. You should know that for now I am remaining here. My brother left the day before yesterday, and I made him take Teresa with him because I don't know whether or not they may want me to take a roundabout route, and I don't want to be burdened with the care of a child. I am well and am feeling rested after all the commotion, for despite my great love for my brother, it bothered me to see him away from his home. I don't know how long I will be staying here, for I am still looking for the best way to bring the work at Malagón to a completion.
2. I was distressed about your illness, and for you to undergo a purge at this time doesn't seem good to me. Keep me informed about your health. May our Lord grant you health as I desire and also grant it to my daughters. I urgently commend myself to the prayers of you all. Your letters delighted me. I have already answered some. I wrote today to my Gabriela and to San Francisco; they know so well how to praise one. Please God they are not lying, and the next time the one shouldn't be telling the same thing that the other is. All three told me about the octave of the Blessed Sacrament, I mean the feast. Anyway, I was not displeased, for it was a pleasure to know that the octave was observed so well. May God reward our Padre Garciálvarez. Kiss his hands for me. I wrote to him the other day.
3. My brother and I were delighted that you got the matter about the excise settled. It is extraordinary how fond he is of you, and I have been affected by it. I was also delighted with the books he sent you and for all the kind care my saintly prior takes of you. May God reward him.
4. I would like you to recount with much detail what those poor friars are doing -- I mean whether there is any way of their being pacified -- and tell me about the Franciscans. Pray for our padre, for he is weighed down with trials. Please God he was right in being so severe with those Fathers. Give my regards to Padre Fray Antonio de Jesús and to Padre Mariano and tell them I am striving to reach the perfection they have attained in not writing to me. Tell Padre Mariano that Padre Fray Baltasar and I are close friends.
5. Yesterday, Juan Díaz came here from Madrid. There is no thought of having a monastery here, because Juan Díaz is returning to Madrid. The king has given orders to our padre to have recourse to the president of the royal council and to Quiroga for the affairs of our order. Please God everything will go well. I repeat that there is a need for much prayer. Also pray for Father General who was thrown from a mule and suffered several fractures in his leg; this distressed me because he is old. Best regards to all my friends, both men and women. Have them do what is indicated on the enclosed paper.
6. Oh, how pleased I am with the tunics I made from the sheets! They say here that it is like wearing linen. May God make you all saints, and give you health. Look after yourself, for it is better to cater to yourself than to be sick.
Today is 11 June.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
