	1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your honor. Oh, what a long fifteen days these have been! Blessed be God that you are well; I was greatly consoled. From what you tell me about your servants and the house, I don't think there is anything excessive. I had a good laugh over the master of ceremonies, and I assure you I found it very amusing. You can really trust her since she is a good and wise person. Give her my fond regards when you see her, for I owe her much, and also to Francisco de Salcedo.
2. I am very sorry about your ailment. The cold will soon begin to bother you. I am better than I have been in years, in my opinion. I have a very lovely little cell, well set apart and with a window looking out into the garden, and not many visitors to take up my time. If I didn't have to write these letters and if there were not so many, I would be so well-off that the condition wouldn't last, for that is what usually happens when things go well for me. If you were here I would lack nothing, but if God favors me by granting you health, the separation can be easily endured. May God reward you for your concern about my health, for my sorrow was relieved when I saw that you are also suffering because of my staying here. I hope in God that I will not have to stay so long and that I can get to Avila by the time the cold weather starts there. Despite the harm the cold can do me, I would not avoid it or delay here one day, for when God so wills he can give us good health anywhere. Oh, how much more for my own happiness do I desire that you be in good health! May God grant it to you, as he can.
3. Juan de Ovalle has written me a long letter in which he insists on how fond he is of you and what he would do to serve you. His only fault was to believe that you favored Cimbrón who he thought had complete control over you; and that was the reason my sister didn't come. Those were feelings of jealousy, I certainly think, for he has a jealous temperament and I suffered much from him because of my friendship with Doña Guiomar. All his complaining is about Cimbrón. In certain matters, he's very childish. He behaved much better in Seville where he showed you much love, and so you should bear up with him for love of God.
4. I wrote to him telling him what I thought and that I saw how much you loved him and that he ought rather to rejoice that Cimbrón was looking after your concerns; and I strongly urged him to try to please you and send you the money if you ask for it, and I added that each one is better off in his own house, that God perhaps had so ordained, and I blamed him and excused Perálvarez. The trouble is that I think he has to come here and that all my efforts to prevent him from coming will have served for naught. Certainly I feel very sorry for my sister, and so we have to suffer much. With regard to you, I swear his desire to please you and serve you is great. God has not given him more. But he has endowed others with the good dispositions needed to put up with him, and this is what you will have to do.
5. The agnusdei is in the little chest, I think; if not, it is in the trunk with the rings. I am telling the subprioress to send the chest to you so that you might take out the papers on the Foundations and send them back to the subprioress in a sealed wrapping. They have to send us I don't know what for my companion and also my mantle, which we had sent them in a hurry. I don't know what other papers are in there, but I wouldn't want anyone to see them, and so I would like you to take them out (for it doesn't matter to me if you see them), and the same holds true for the Foundations.
6. The key for the little chest broke. Force the chest open and keep it in another larger chest until a key is made for it. In the little chest is a key for a mail pouch that I am sending you, for also in it are some papers, I think, on matters concerning prayer. Feel free to read them and take out the paper on which some details about the foundation of Alba are written. Send it to me with the other papers because Father Visitator has asked me to finish writing the Foundations, and I need these papers to know what I have already written and about Alba. It's hard for me to have to take up this task, for the time that I have left after tending to letter-writing, I would like to spend in solitude and rest. It doesn't seem God wants this. May the Lord be pleased to make use of this work.
7. You ought to know that the prioress of Valladolid has written me that Doña María de Mendoza had a copy made of the book the bishop once had, and that he has the copy in his possession. I was delighted for your sake, because when I come we can arrange to have you see it. Don't tell anyone. If he should happen to go there, you could feel free to ask him for it.
8. I will write what you say to Seville, for I don't know if the letter was received. Why bother about four reales? Either they were not enclosed in the letter, or the carrier knowing that something was enclosed did not deliver it to them. The prioress here is in much better health than usual; she and all the sisters kiss your hands. We have prayed much for your health. I am sending you some quinces so that your housekeeper may make them into preserves and you can eat them after your meal, and also a box of marmalade, and another for the subprioress at St. Joseph's who, they tell me, is very weak. Tell her to eat it, and I beg you not to give any of yours to anyone but eat it for love of me. And when you finish it, let me know, for it is inexpensive here and I'm not using money from the monastery. Padre Gracián gave me orders under obedience to continue doing as I usually do, for what I had was not for me but for the order. On the one hand I have regretted this; on the other, since there are so many expenses to meet here, even if it involve no more than postage, I rejoiced. It pains me that postage costs so much, and there are many other things to pay for ...
