1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. Today I sent you some letters through the chief courier. You must not forget to tell me whether you receive them. I believe they will surely arrive in Seville, for he is a brother of one of our nuns.
2. I told you that Tostado left for Portugal the day you arrived here. Infante and another preacher from Andalusia were waiting for him and sent a messenger to Madrid who brought them back this news. Blessed be the Lord who has so ordained.
3. You should know that the members of the Council say that if they are to give the license on the basis of the usual procedure, they cannot do so, for we need to have more convincing reasons. If they see a letter from the nuncio saying that he grants it, they will give it without further discussion. This information was given by a magistrate friend to Don Pedro González. Write to me through those returning from the chapter about what we can do and whether it would be good to seek counsel from someone in Madrid, like the duke or others.
4. I have begun to suspect they have impeded him with letters from Rome from giving these permissions, for he gave them to Padre Fray Antonio easily, it seems to me. I have also been thinking that if they give this false information to the pope, and there is no one there to counter it, they will get as many briefs as they want against us, and that it is most important that we have some of our friars there. When it is seen how our own live, the prejudice of the others will become obvious. I don't think we ought to do anything until that moment comes. Then our friars can bring back the authorization to found a few houses. Believe me, it's very important to be prepared for what may come about.
5. I am writing this in a hurry and so cannot say any more than that everyone recommends themselves to your prayers; and I to the prayers of all the Fathers there, especially Father Prior of Los Remedios, although I'm angry with him. I want to know if Padre Mariano came. May God watch over you and lead you by his hand, amen.
6. I am overjoyed to see what nice weather it is for traveling. I am waiting for Antonio. Don't forget to write to tell me the name of the man to whom I must send the letters going to Madrid, that servant of your father's. Be careful not to forget, and tell me how to address the envelope and if he is someone who should be reimbursed for the postage.
Today is 5 September.
7. We are well and it seems I'm feeling somewhat relieved to see that it is easier to write to you from here.
Your paternity's unworthy daughter and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
8. Be careful, mi padre, not to lose the paper I gave you, for you said you would place it in the lining but you did not do so. I would like you to keep a copy of it in your little coffer, for many complications would arise if it were lost.
