1. Jesus be with your paternity. The carrier of this letter has just arrived, but he is allowing me little time, and so I can say no more than what's needed. I praise the Lord you arrived in good health. I have sent you letters by two different routes, informing you that Peralta left for Portugal on the same Thursday that you arrived here. Santelmo wrote me today -- and I am enclosing his letter -- that we have nothing to fear, that Methuselah is determined to grant our desire of separating out the eagles, for he sees clearly that this is the fitting thing to do.
2. I received a letter today from Seville about the excitement and enthusiasm aroused down there by the news concerning Peralta and how the whole town is being told that the butterflies will have to submit to him. Indeed, what the Lord has done is fitting. May he be blessed forever. Infante came to speak to me; he wanted a letter for Paul. I told him that Paul wouldn't do anything for me, that he should speak to him himself. He doesn't think he is at fault. I believe that if he had any hope for the return of Peralta, he wouldn't be so submissive.
3. In regard to what you say about the prioress of Malagón, I have already written to you about that. In a matter so serious you ought not leave the decision to me, so much more so because in knowing your desire I would not in conscience be able to oppose it. So I beg you to do what you think best, and consider who you think would make a good prioress there. She would have to have more capabilities than is required for subprioress. I can't think of anyone other than the prioress of Salamanca. I don't know the one you mention and she is still new. The other one mentioned would function very poorly in the role of prioress. This distresses me. Recommend this intention to God and give orders about what to do. The actual circumstances make it difficult to transfer nuns. May the Lord direct things, for necessity has no law.
Today is Thursday, 6 September.
I have no time to write to my Padre Fray Antonio or say anything more.
Your paternity's servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
