1. Jesus be with your reverence. I assure you that since I so enjoy your letters I look forward to receiving them. I don't know why it is that I have so special a love for your house and those who live there, unless it's because I suffered so many trials there. I am well now, glory to God. The fevers ended up in a bad cold.
2. I saw clearly the trial you would have to undergo because of the words and deeds of those Fathers. Even here there has been no lack of trial. But since God has delivered us from Tostado, I hope in His Majesty that we will be shown favor in everything else. I don't believe there is the slightest exaggeration in accusing him of hostility toward the discalced friars and me, for he gave clear signs of this. There is always need for much prayer that God will deliver our padre from these men and give them light and restore order in these matters. As long as our most reverend general is so displeased, I tell you there will be no lack of means for us to gain merit.
3. Because you will learn about everything from our padre, I'm not saying anything about this, except that I beg you out of charity to write to me, when our padre is unable, about what is going on, and give him my letters and send me a summary of his. You see what anxieties one goes through when present there. Imagine what I must go through being so far away. The chief mail carrier here is a cousin of one of our nuns in Segovia. He has come to see me and promises to do wonders for you. His name is Figueredo. He is, as I say, the chief mail carrier here. We have come to an agreement, and he says that if down there you take care to give the letters to the chief carrier, I will receive them in about eight days. What a great thing that would be! He says that by placing the packet for me in a folder addressed to Figueredo, the chief carrier in Toledo, no letter will be lost even if there are many. It's more work for you, but I know that you would take on even more for me, as I would for you.
4. You should know that at times I have such a desire to see you that it would seem I have nothing else to think about; this is true. You can find out down there whether you must use the title magnífico or something else. He has an important position. For this reason I am happier to stay here now, for Avila is an inconvenient place as far as these services go and for other things as well. I'm only sorry because of my brother who finds the separation difficult. You're wrong for not writing to him now and then. In the enclosed letter of his, you will see how bad his health is, although I praise God that he has no fever.
5. I never remember to keep the letters they write me about Teresa. All of the nuns tell of how they are in awe at the perfection they see in her and her inclination to assume the lowest offices. She tells them they shouldn't think that because she is the niece of the foundress they should esteem her more, but less. They are very fond of her; they say any number of things about her. I tell you this so that you give praise to God, for you were the nuns who directed her toward the desire for this good. I am delighted that you pray to His Majesty for her. I love her dearly and also her father, but I assure you I am at rest to be far away. I can't understand why, unless it is that the joys of this life are wearisome for me. I must be afraid of becoming attached to anything in it, and so it is better to remove the occasion; although so as not to be ungrateful for what my brother has done, I would like to be there now because he wants me present for the settling of certain matters.
6. Do not fail to let him know about the excise on the sale of the house, and me too; the information should conform to what is on the enclosed paper. I see clearly that you are not going to have enough money, and so I began dealing with the Nicolao matter so that they will give you at the appropriate time the 400 ducats. I had refused that postulant because they told me she had I don't know what kind of scar. Nicolao wrote me another letter, which I am enclosing. Our padre told me she isn't suited for us. Nonetheless, I have not been insistent, because in our present need one could consider if it may not be fitting to give her a try. Perhaps she will turn out to be good. Speak of the matter with our padre if you think you need to and find out about her faults, for I spoke to him only a little about this. I see that your income is poor. I was surprised to learn that Beatriz's mother brought no more than 1500 ducats, although she is such that even if she brought no dowry you would gain a great deal. I am happy that you are making stockings and earning a profit. God helps those who help themselves.
7. In answer to what you say about paying the rent by selling the other things, it would clearly be a very great blessing to be free of that burden. If adding the dowry of Bernalda{Bernarda}, I mean of Pablos, the sum should reach 3,000 ducats, you should accept it. Speak about it first with some competent persons. When they added that condition, Padre Mariano told me it didn't matter, that even though it was added they would have to take the money because anything else would be unjust. Inquire about everything; before paying the rent, see that you have money in the house. Let Padre Garciálvarez speak with the different ones, and they should speak about it to our padre, for when he is there you needn't consult me about anything, but consult him. Please God Leonor's dowry will not be reduced. Tell me how she is doing -- for I am not at all satisfied with her intelligence -- and if she shows good will.
8. As for Vanegas, it would be a difficult thing to accept someone now who has nothing for a dowry. This could only be tolerated by doing it for the love of God alone, for no one has been accepted there under the title of an alms, and God will help us. Perhaps he will draw others to help us because of our doing this for him. This should be done only if the family pleads insistently with our padre and he gives you orders. You shouldn't say a word. And be careful, my friend, that you are not in a hurry to accept nuns, for your life depends on their being suited for us. This one of Nicolao's seems to be pretty and nothing else.
9. The niece or cousin of Garciálvarez, in my opinion, is certainly all that I told you she is. Caballar told me. I don't believe it is Doña Clemencia, but the other one. You can tell Garciálvarez frankly that they've told you she has suffered from great melancholy. He told me clearly she is insane, so I said no more. This was my impression, and I don't believe I am mistaken. The other girls have a father, and you will have a hard time getting something. Even were this not so, there would be no reason now to burden the house unless to free oneself at once from debt. Let's wait a little, for with the uproar caused by those friars down there, I am not surprised that no one is entering.
10. Keep track of all that you spend on postage so that you can subtract it from the forty ducats they have sent from St. Joseph's in Avila; and be careful not to do anything else, for that would not show zeal but foolishness. I have a reason for saying this. How can you presume to send money already! This struck me as funny, since I am so worried about what you are going to live on. Nevertheless, it arrived at an opportune time for paying the postage. May God reward you, and for the orange blossom water, which is very good, and for Juana de la Cruz's veil. However, you should not presume to do things like this again, for when I want something I will certainly let you know, and, I think, with greater openness and desire than I would with those in whom I have the greatest trust. For I believe that you and the nuns would willingly do whatever I ask. The one with the beautiful voice never came back. I am carefully watching for someone who would be suitable for your community.
11. Oh, how I hope they will give you the water! I have wanted this so much that I can't believe it. I have some hope that Padre Mariano, or our padre, will be able to work something out with Fray Buenaventura, since he is the Franciscans' guardian. May the Lord bring it about, for it would be a great relief. You can assuredly believe that it would mean more to me to be down there, now that our padre is on his way, than up here, even if I were to undergo some difficult moments because of the bishop. I am amazed by the joy I feel in the thought of returning to you. God does everything for the best. May he be blessed for everything and keep you for me many years.
12. So as not to sadden you I didn't want to speak to you about my own sorrow over the condition of our prioress in Malagón, although God has drawn profit from worse situations. Apart from how much I love her, her loss is a terrible thing for us at this time. I would have brought her here, but our doctor tells me that though she was given a year to live, she wouldn't live more than a month here. May the Lord find a remedy. Pray hard for her. Her condition is really hopeless. They say it's consumption. Be careful not to drink sarsaparilla water, even though it may be good against hysteria. The prioress and the sisters send their regards.
13. I have been very sorry about the illness of my holy prior, and we are praying for him. Let me know about him and of what has been done about Delgado, and if Beatriz and her sister were left something by their mother that should go to the house, and give my regards to all those you think it fitting, and remain with God. I have gone on at length and am happy to know that you are all well, especially you. I fear for our prioresses when I see the state we have come to. May God preserve you, my daughter.
14. At times I receive letters from Beas and Caravaca. They have no lack of trials in Caravaca, but I hope in God a remedy will be found.
Today is 7 September.
Your Reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus
15. Let us now write more often. See that you don't neglect this or fail to be solicitous at times for our padre. He fully agrees with us about not serving meals to the friars. We have insisted on this so much that I wouldn't want him to go to extremes, and you can determine what his need is and consider how much his health matters to us.
16. How come you never say anything about Fray Gregorio? Give him my best wishes and tell me how the friars are doing -- if you don't write me about everything, no one will -- and how you are getting on with Fray Antonio de Jesús.
17. I will not answer Nicolao until I hear from you. You should pay half a real when you have no more than three or four letters; if you have more, then pay more.
18. Since I know what it's like to be in need and how hard it is to find money there, I did not dare reject entirely Nicolao's recommendation. When you ask our padre for his opinion on a matter, you need to inform him about everything without hurrying him; otherwise, because he's so busy, the importance of the matter will escape him.
