1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. I can truthfully say that your letters are such a consolation. When I read the one and thought there were no more, I myself was surprised by the happiness I felt when I discovered another one; it was as though I hadn't received the first. You should then realize that your letters are a kind of recreation for me. Always send me a separate note listing the particular items you want me to respond to so that I don't forget anything.
2. With regard to the nuns, our padre left word, I think, that Beatriz's mother could enter, and I was delighted. So you are doing well to accept her, and you can give her the habit with my best wishes, for I am especially happy about this. And tell her that I would be happy to be there with her. I already wrote you to accept Beatriz for profession -- I will tell our padre. And give her my regards and tell her not to forget me on that day.
3. Regarding Garciálvarez's cousins, I don't know if you recall that I was told that one had been melancholic to the extreme, for she lost her mind. I don't believe it is Doña Constanza. Speak about the matter plainly. As for the niece, I know nothing. If suited for us, anyone from his family is preferable to others. Make a thorough inquiry and write for permission from our padre when you are fully informed. He will be in Almodóvar for now, as you will have learned, since the discalced friars are holding a chapter, an excellent thing for them to do. Why is it you didn't say anything about Padre Fray Gregorio's illness? I indeed felt sorry in hearing about it.
4. Getting back to the nuns, the aspirant with the beautiful voice of whom I wrote to you never returned. There is another one whom Nicolao highly recommends -- and Padre Mariano says that Nicolao will do so much for the house. This aspirant will bring a little over 400 ducats in addition to her trousseau. But she will give them right away. This is what I am trying to bring about, that you receive the interest and be free of worry. And there will even be enough to pay the excise on the sale's agreement. I am so sorry that the affair hadn't been concluded before that other one died; perhaps it's for the best.
5. Be always careful to prefer some agreement; and don't forget this, for our padre wrote me that a very learned man in Madrid told him we are not in the right and that even if we were, litigations are always troublesome. Don't forget this.
6. They have told me that this nun is very good. I have urged Juan Díaz to meet with her; if whatever the facial mark they say she has is unsightly she should not be accepted. I was attracted by the dowry money that, it is said, will be given as soon as we want it, for the money from Beatriz's mother and Pablo ought not to be touched; it should be reserved for making the principal payment. If you use it up for other expenses, you will be left with a heavy burden, which is a terrible thing. I would like if possible to send you help from here. I am going to inquire thoroughly about that young lady. They praise her highly, and indeed she is from up here. I will try to meet her.
7. As for what you say about the sermons, it is all right for now. In the present circumstances do what they tell you. In the future you must follow our Acts, however annoyed others become.
8. I repeat that I would not want you to sell this sister's goods, but we should look for other means. Otherwise, we will be left with that burdensome debt. It would be onerous to try to pay everything at once with Pablo's money. You would be left in a weakened situation.
9. Oh, how the letter from my daughters pleased us. I tell you it was excellent. Give them my regards and tell them I am obliged to write to Garciálvarez. I am delighted that he is in the present mood. Nonetheless, you should all be careful, for he is so perfect that what we might think is edifying will scandalize him. That region down there is not noted for its simplicity.
10. I am extremely delighted that the bishop is well and have given thanks to God. Tell him this when you see him, and if you don't see him very often, don't worry about it. Now the letters are well done, for each one tells me about something different. I was delighted with them.
11. Teresa is doing very well. The perfection she showed on the journey is something to praise God for; it was astonishing. She didn't want to sleep even one night outside the monastery. I assure you that just as you worked hard with her, she is now an honor to you. I can never finish thanking you for the good training you gave her, nor can her father. He is well. I tore up a letter that she had written me, which made us laugh. In your charity, please always pray for her; I ask this especially of her teacher. They write me that she is still homesick for Seville and praises you all highly. I think that some letters for the assistant will be included with these letters; if not, I'll send them later.
12. Today I wrote to Madrid to ask the Count of Olivares to write. It would be a very fortunate thing if he did. May God bring it about. I'll do what I can. Please God I'll be able to do something. I am greatly consoled to know that the house is cool; in exchange for this, I will be glad to put up with the heat here. Don't send me anything, for goodness' sake, for it costs more than it's worth. Some of the quinces arrived in good condition, but not many. The little fish were good. The tuna was left in Malagón and will do much good. Because they will write to you, I will not mention anything about their trials and the prioress's poor health; although the spitting up of blood has stopped, glory to God. May he watch over you, my daughters, and make you holy, amen.
13. I don't think one dares answer your letter. Nonetheless, I assure you that since you are wearing tunics of worsted wool, you can wear underskirts made of the same material without any imperfection. I much prefer this to fine wool.
Today is 9 September.
Your reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus
