1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be ever with your honor. It seems to me our Lord is treating you as he does the strong, for since you want to be poor he is taking away your income. May he be blessed for everything, for he enriches those he loves by exercising them in suffering.
2. At the time I found out, I felt distressed. I was told of this by our Father Visitator who learned of it from the illustrious president of the Royal Council. Afterward I began to think it is for the best, for it is not possible that our Lord would neglect to care for you now that you are without a livelihood. May our Lord so direct events that you might serve him more. This is what all of us must desire who love you in the Lord, for it is what most suits you. I earnestly beseech God for this; the sisters here do likewise, and those up there will not fail to do the same. It is impossible for God to fail to do what most befits you. So, be very confident and joyful.
3. I have been happy since your servant told me that for a year you have been very well, without having any of your usual ailments. It wasn't Mother Prioress who told me. May God be praised and repay you for the help you are always giving the sisters, which seems inspired by God since you never tire of doing so. The Lord will satisfy this debt we owe you, for he is a very good paymaster.
4. I do not thank you more often for this since I know about you and you about me in another way. But be certain this doesn't mean any lack of gratitude; if I could serve you even to the point of it costing me my life and peace, I think I would do it ... May God grant you peace, as he can here below, so that you will enjoy the eternal rest.
5. The Bishop of Troya is not here, and so the chalice is not consecrated. They say he will come soon. I will arrange to send it to him when he comes. Have it repaired there in the meantime. I beg you not to forget to pray for me in your holy Masses. May His Majesty keep you many years, giving you the holiness I beg of him, amen.
Today is 13 September.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
