1. Jesus be with your reverence. The carrier for this letter is in such a hurry that I can't say any more than that I am well and that Padre Mariano arrived late yesterday. I enjoyed your letter. Glory to God that you are all well.
2. Don't accept the daughter of the Portuguese -- or whatever he is -- if he doesn't first deposit with a third person what he must give you. I have learned that you won't be able to get a cent of it, and this is no time for us to accept a postulant for nothing; be careful not to do otherwise.
3. Give the enclosed letters to our Father Provincial personally. And tell him not to be disturbed. Up here Padre Mariano and I are looking into what is going on down there to see if we can find a solution and we will do everything we possibly can. Tell him as well that after these letters were written I was going to entrust them to the good Antonio Ruiz, who was going to Madrid, when Padre Mariano arrived. I was delighted to see him and to know that the Lord is now so arranging our affairs that those Fathers are going to leave before being thrown out.
4. Write to me, for goodness' sake, at once and in detail about what is going on. Don't leave this to our padre, for he won't have time. Many greetings to Señor Garciálvarez and tell him that I long to see him. Look at my desires, so seemingly impossible to realize. May God reward him for all the favors he does us and watch over him; and also our good prior, for whom we have prayed hard. I'm happy that he's somewhat better. Tell me also about your health, and tell our padre how much I would have wanted Padre Mariano to wait for him.
5. Regards to my daughters, and remain with God, my friend. The nuns in Caravaca have been sick; I am told they have written to you. They are doing well now and already buying a house. Since I have not answered their letter, I'm not sending it on to you. I was delighted with the news from Beas and the accounts of Padre Fray Gregorio; I will write to him.
Mother Prioress in Malagón is very sick.
I think today is 26 September.
Your reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus
