1. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. If the letter you sent by way of Madrid had not arrived, I would have been in a fine state, for today is the day after the feast of St. Francis and Fray Antonio has not come; nor did I know whether you had arrived in good health until I saw your letter.
2. May God be blessed that you are well and that Paul is too and interiorly at rest. Surely so complete an improvement seems supernatural. All of that must be necessary for this nature of ours, for such things serve well to humiliate and give us self-knowledge. I prayed earnestly here that the Lord would give him a period of calm, for it seems to me he has enough other trials. Tell him this for me.
3. Right now I am without any trials. I don't know where this will end up. They have given me a cell set apart like a hermitage and very cheerful, and my health is good, and I am away from relatives, although they reach me through their letters. Only my worries about what is going on down there trouble me. I tell you that as far as what pleases me goes you had a good idea in choosing to let me stay here. And even regarding the worries I mentioned, I feel more confident than usual.
4. Last night I was reading the story of Moses and about the troubles he brought on the king and his whole kingdom with those plagues and how they never touched him. In fact, I was amazed and happy to see that no one has the power to cause harm if the Lord does not wish it. I enjoyed the account of the crossing of the Red Sea, thinking of how much less it is that we are asking for. It pleased me to see that saint in the midst of those conflicts by order of God. I was feeling joy at seeing my Eliseo in the same situation and I offered him again to God. I remembered the favors Joseph has granted me and what he has said about him: "Still much more has to be endured for the honor and glory of God". I was consumed with the desire to find myself amid a thousand perils in order to serve him. With these and similar thoughts my life is passing. I've also written the foolish things you will find enclosed.
5. Now I am going to begin writing the story of the Foundations which Joseph told me will be for the benefit of many souls. If God helps, I believe this will be so. But even apart from this locution, I had already decided to write the account since you had ordered me to do it. I was delighted that you gave such a long report at the chapter. I don't know how those who have written contrary to what you reported are not ashamed. It is fortunate that those who perhaps would have had to leave against their will are leaving of their own accord. It seems to me our Lord is straightening out our affairs. May it please His Majesty that what we are doing will bring him glory and be of benefit to those souls. You will be doing well if you give orders from your own monastery about what should be done. Then they won't have to be observing whether you go to choir or not; I tell you everything will go better. Here, our prayers are not lacking; they are better weapons than the ones used by those Fathers.
6. I wrote to you at length through the chief courier, and while waiting to know if you have received those letters, I have been writing by way of Madrid. About the matter concerning David, I think he will hoodwink Padre Esperanza, as he usually does, for they are together and his brother has left. Although the presence of Fray Buenaventura can accomplish much, I fear that it will do no more than create obstacles, for the two know about the matter. This is fortunate because, God forgive me, I wish David would return to his first calling. I have learned nothing more since I've been here.
Your paternity's daughter and servant,
Teresa of Jesus
