For Mother Prioress of St. Joseph's in Seville.
1. Jesus be with your reverence. I don't know how it is you let the muleteer leave without sending a letter, especially since our padre is down there and we would like to get news about him every day. I greatly envy all of you that you have him with you there. For goodness' sake, don't do this any more; and don't fail to write to me about everything that is happening. Our padre's letters are short, and when he doesn't have time to write, you should be sure to do so. I've already written to you about the means you can use to send me frequent letters.
2. I was delighted to learn, through the letter that Padre Mariano brought -- Fray Antonio has not come -- that you and all the nuns are well and that an agreement has been reached concerning the excise.
3. My brother is now well. He is always happy to receive news about you. I've already told you not to fail to write to him now and again. He bought some property -- which he was already considering when he was down there -- near Avila, I think a league and a half away, or not quite that. It has pasture lands, grain fields, and woods. It cost him 14,000 ducats, but the papers have not yet been drawn up. He says that what has happened down there has taught him a lesson not to close the purchase unless everything is very safe and clear, for he doesn't want any problems. Pray for him and his sons (who already have opportunities for marriage) that they will serve God.
4. You should know that as soon as I arrived here, thinking that we would leave immediately, the trunk and all the packages were sent ahead with a muleteer. And I don't know if it was in unpacking or how, but Teresa's large agnusdei and the two emerald rings are missing, nor do I remember where I put them or if they were given to me. Really, I felt sad to see how everything happened so as to contradict the joy she had in the thought that I would be there with her; she needs me in many ways. Try to remember if these objects were in the house when we left, and ask Gabriela if she remembers where I might have put them, and pray that they may be found.
5. I was very surprised by what you told me about the Fathers in the Society. As that other person told you, they are almost as rigorous as we are. It would be good if Padre Garciálvarez were to speak to them. My regards to him and to all my daughters and to Father Prior of Las Cuevas. We are praying hard for his return to health. May it please God to give it to him, for his illness distresses me and I am not going to write to him until I know that he is better. Keep me informed of his condition as often as you have a messenger.
6. It would be good, despite all this, if you were to arrange at times to have someone from the Society hear the nuns' confessions. This would help toward removing the fear they have in our regard. Padre Acosta would be very good, if you could get him. May God forgive them, for if she is so rich, her entry would bring an end to their problems; yet, since His Majesty didn't bring her to us, he will provide. Perhaps there was a greater need for her in the community she entered.
7. I thought that since Fray Buenaventura was there the negotiations about the water would improve, but it doesn't seem there is any easing off. May God permit us to pay for the house; then, having money, you will be able to obtain everything. Let things go for now, since you have good wells. We would pay highly here for one of them, for this matter of getting water is a real problem.
8. Tell me how the visitation of Fray Buenaventura is going, and what is being done about the monastery they abolished near Córdoba, for I know nothing. I am feeling well and am at your service, as they say. Tell me also whether our padre comes to your monastery to eat sometimes and how you cater to him, for he cannot be catered to in his own monastery, nor would it appear right. Send me news about everything, and remain with God, for now we will be able to write often, as is fitting.
9. I was amused by the account of the old woman you have there and how she used the stairs. Tell me if the boy is still there and if you have anyone to do your errands. Mother Prioress in Malagón wrote to me that she is doing better; but that illness is such that a little improvement is not enough to make me happy. Keep her always in your prayers. May His Majesty watch over you, my daughter, and make you a saint, and all your daughters as well. Amen.
10. In the enclosed letter from Sister Alberta you will see how things are going in Caravaca. I was delighted with the letter from Beas (for I hadn't received any news from them in some time) and that that nun who is very rich entered there. Everything is working out well, glory to God. Always pray hard for our padre, and for me too, for I am in need.
Yesterday was the feast of St. Francis.
11. Enclosed is the postage, for it's expensive, and be careful to let me know if you do not have the money to take good care of our padre when the occasion arises; and don't be proud, for that's foolish. I can send it to you. And take care of your health, if for no other reason than not to kill me, for I tell you the sickness of the prioress in Malagón is costing me dearly. May God provide by restoring her health, amen.
Your reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
12. When letters are entrusted to the muleteer, you can enclose the postage. When they are not, you know what usually happens if you enclose it; the letters are at risk of never arriving. I tell you this so that you will never do it.
