1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, mi padre. Your house is so far out of the way that even though I want to, I have no one through whom I can answer you, and so I have waited until the departure of these fathers.
2. Concerning Padre Fray Antonio, perhaps God did us a favor because, as I understand, he suffered from serious melancholy, which, considering our diet, would have become much worse. May God be with him, for what he suffers certainly seems to come more from lack of health than from lack of a good spirit. You can't avoid its becoming known, for they will have to provide for a preacher in Almodóvar. Please God he will return to his order. Neither by his having come nor by his leaving does our own order lose anything.
3. I thought you would pass by on your return, but only a slight detour was enough to prevent you from coming. Your desire to please me must not be very great, for even when you were here before, I got to speak with you only a little. You should know that in a similar measure I have very little influence in doing anything about what you wrote concerning the departure for Rome. For some time now I have been asking that someone go to Rome and haven't even succeeded in getting anyone to write a letter to the one who ought to receive a letter. But it is enough that we do what we can, come what may. And the matter doesn't depend on our Father Visitator, for he has already done what he could; but so many people are making different recommendations that mine count for little. I deeply regret not being able to do more. I thought this trip had been decided on; that is what I was told. May God provide, and for goodness' sake don't neglect to hurry things along; you can do more than I can.
4. Although I sent the letters to Seville and Almodóvar at once, I think Father Prior had already arrived in Madrid and is still there. I also sent the one to Caravaca, which was a lucky thing, for a carrier was about to leave for that region, and there aren't many who go there. I am very sorry about Fray Gabriel's illness. Tell him this and give him my regards, for we are praying for him here. He is a Father for whom I have a great affection, although he has little for me.
5. Our padre has written me that he arrived in good health and that some of the Fathers of the cloth have left and that the conventual chapter was satisfied with him. There is nothing else except that those Fathers are being docile and sending intercessors to him. If God watches over him for us, I think he will do much good. Don't neglect to take care to pray for him, and for me too. I entrust myself to the prayers of all the Fathers there; the prioress asks for yours. May our Lord make you as holy as I beg of him, amen.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
