1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. Yesterday I wrote to you of how those fathers had so calmed down that I praised God for it. You should know that the mandate and the Motu had still not been read to them. I feared very much what has now come about, and today one of them came and told me they have reacted strangely. Since they think they are right, they will surely cause a stir. They say what I have often told Padre Mariano (and I am pretty sure I even wrote this to you) that to give commands as a superior without showing where the authority comes from is something that is never done.
2. In regard to what you said in your letter about Padre Mariano, about why you did not send the brief, certainly if there were reason for doubt, it would have been better to think of this beforehand. If only they would free you from that task and leave you free for us discalced friars and nuns.
3. Padre Padilla will tell you how Melchizedek says that according to the council I cannot make foundations and that our Most Reverend Father has expressly declared this. I would like it very much if you could look over this declaration, if possible. As for what he says about my bringing nuns around with me, I do so always with permission from superiors. I have here the very permission Melchizedeck himself gave me to bring nuns to Beas and Caravaca. How is it that he didn't take this into consideration at that time since the declaration had already existed then? If only they'd leave me in peace.
4. May God give you, mi padre, the rest I desire for you. Perhaps these Fathers will now disgorge all the venom and be better afterward, although in my opinion they were very disposed to obey. This clash has not bothered me. Rather, I enjoy all this opposition, for it is a sign that God will be well served.
5. The enclosed letter for you has to do with the project in Salamanca, for I think they have written to you about it. I wrote to them that the work was not suited to discalced friars. If a place is provided for them there, all right; but not that they be vicars (for I don't think anything else is wanted). Two months is a very short time for such a work. The bishop is not asking this of them. Neither does he show any desire that they be sent to that place, nor are they meant for such works. I would like it if the discalced friars were to be looked upon there as beings from another world and not as friars coming and going in the service of women. We have won over the bishop to our cause without this. But we could perhaps lose him if we accepted such a work. I don't know if good Don Teutonio will do anything, for his chances are limited and he is not a good negotiator. If I were there to stir things up, I truly believe we'd succeed. And perhaps this could be so, if you thought it fitting. I wrote to them about all of this.
6. The prioress and other nuns ask for your prayers and those of the Fathers there with you; I ask for those of Fray Gregorio. My Isabel is well and very enjoyable, and Señora Doña Juana and her family are also well. Give my regards now and then, for charity's sake, to the lord prosecutor and to the archbishop, and also to Señora Delgada and to your other women friends, especially Bernarda. Let this request be a standing one. Remain with God, for it is very late.
Today is the feast of St. Hilarion, my Father.
Your paternity's servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
