1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. I already answered your letters, which arrived in good condition through the mail carrier, and they were a delight for me. But I am writing again because I'm sorry about your illness. For goodness' sake write me at once about your health and about what you know concerning our padre. I have envied your general confession. You certainly didn't have as much to confess as I, for I wouldn't have been able to make it so easily. Blessed be God who loves us all.
2. My brother writes in a letter I received today that he has written you and sent someone to collect a third of the amount you owe him. He is well and the purchase of the property has been finalized. The nuns at St. Joseph's are not faring badly. Teresa writes to me from there. The agnusdei and the rings that I was at first worried about have reappeared, glory be to God. I am well, but soon the clock will strike 1 a.m. and so I will not be long. I would like some news about my good prior of Las Cuevas.
3. Last week they sent some fresh tuna from Malagón and it was very good and we enjoyed it. I have not broken the fast since the feast of the Holy Cross; see how well I am! Our prioress in Malagón, who has written me that she is better, did so, saint that she is, to console me. Her improvement has not amounted to anything. Today I received a letter from her, and she is very sick with severe nausea, which makes matters all the worse because of her weak condition. We are praying fervently for her, but my sins are great. I know there's no need to ask you to pray for her, but I'm doing this with all the communities.
4. Doña Guiomar was married today. She is delighted to know that you are doing well, and so is Doña Luisa, who has never shown me such love, and her concern for my comfort is by no means slight. Pray for them, and give my fondest regards to all the sisters.
5. I am worried about those monasteries our padre has charge of. I am now offering him the help of the discalced nuns and would willingly offer myself. I tell him that the whole thing is a great pity; and he immediately tells me how you are pampering him. May God preserve you for me. Warn him not to eat with those friars, for goodness' sake. I don't know why he goes down there, unless to provide us all with trials. I have already told you to take what you spend on him from the sum of money sent by St. Joseph's. You see, it would be foolish to do otherwise. And I know what I am saying. The money will be repaid without your realizing how. Don't do anything else. Let the good subprioress keep track of everything; she could do so even of the water. Regards to her and to my Gabriela. May God be with all of you.
6. With what the sister brings, and as much as you can add to it, pay at once on the house so that you will not have such high interest payments, which are a heavy burden, for even if they don't want ...
