For Padre Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián, apostolic commissary for Carmel.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. The Foundations is nearing completion. I think you will be delighted to see it. It makes for pleasant reading. See how well I obey! Sometimes I even wonder if I have this virtue, for if one gives me an order in jest, I want to take it seriously. And I carry out the orders more eagerly than I do this letter-writing, for all the bustle involved is killing me. I don't know how I found time for what I have written, and I have not failed to find some for Joseph either, who is the one who gives me strength for everything.
2. I am also fasting, for the cold in this area is not bad, and so it doesn't do me the harm that it does elsewhere. For goodness' sake, give my Padre Fray Antonio best regards from me; although it would be better, if possible, not to let him know that I am writing so much to you and so little to him. Perhaps I will write him a few words.
3. Had San Telmo taken the matter of his nun as Nicolao did, I wouldn't have had to bear so much. I tell you I don't know what to think, for we are not becoming saints in this life. If you could only see the qualities of the first nun, which make her acceptable, and how San Telmo treats the prioress. May it please God, mi padre, that we will have need for no one else but God himself. At least, San Telmo would not get any cooperation from me, even if the whole world were to collapse, since I see how this goes against my conscience. And, nonetheless, he says that he is no more interested in her than he would be in some stranger passing by on the street. What a life! And what would he do if he were interested in her. I would be afraid to take in someone that he proposes.
4. Mariano is frightened by it, and because I think he will write to you, I have mentioned it so you will not worry; we've done more than we should have. Well, he will come to know the truth, and if he doesn't, it matters little. What matters to me for my tranquility is that God keep you very holy.
5. Today is the vigil of All Saints. All Souls Day is the anniversary of my receiving the habit. Ask God to make me a genuine Carmelite nun, for better late than never.
My regards to the prosecutor and to Acosta and the rector.
Your unworthy servant and loyal subject. Blessed be God, for I will always be so, come what may.
Teresa of Jesus
6. The enclosed sheet of paper has a carol in honor of the saints that the nuns are sending you as an expression of their desire to have you here. They say that for some days God has been doing everything they ask of him here. From what I've seen, they are right.
