1. Jesus be with your reverence, my daughter. For love of God, try to find out when our padre receives a letter from me, even though I almost never fail to write to you when writing to him. A letter of his delivered today, written on 22 October, says he hasn't received one from me for a long time -- and I don't do any thing but write. I wrote at length especially when I could use the muleteer's services. I wouldn't want someone to get hold of them. If they were lost, that wouldn't matter so much. Perhaps they are held up in the house of the chief courier down there, for they definitely leave from here. You should inquire there at times to see if they have any letters.
2. Before I forget, the large agnusdei and the rings have shown up. The nuns are all doing well in Avila as you will see by these enclosed letters. My brother tells me he was delighted with your letters, and he laughed a great deal and showed them to the nuns at St. Joseph's. He is going to write to you, for he is very fond of all of you. And I tell you that I am too.
3. You tell me that Nicolao is helping you all very much and that he will be confessor to the nuns. That is very good. Be kind to him, and write and tell me whether you are well, and not in roundabout ways but truthfully.
4. As for the health of the prioress in Malagón, I don't know what to say to you but that she is very bad. There has been talk now of bringing her here, but the doctor here says that doing so would only hasten her end. The illness is of the kind for which God alone is the true doctor. The locality does nothing either positively or negatively in such an illness. I am advising them again not to drink sarsaparilla water.
5. I wrote to Garciálvarez and a great deal to our padre about him. Tell me in detail how everything is going for you and why you do not make our padre eat meat on some days. Be with God, for I wrote to you so recently that I have nothing more to say, except ask that you give my regards to all the nuns.
Today is the vigil of All Saints.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
