1. ... Now she tells me she has the money she owes you. ... She doesn't dare send it to you until you have chosen someone to whom she can entrust it and who will show her a letter from you. Be on the watch, then, for the day when the muleteer leaves there. If he is trustworthy, it would be best for him to bring the money, or better, deliver it. Antonio Ruiz must go ... from Malagón. He would be delighted because this is not the suitable time for proceeding with work on the house, and so he has nothing to do in Malagón. It's better that he hurry things along down there. You would be doing him a favor by providing him with a way out of his difficulties, and you would be losing nothing. In beginning this letter, I was thinking more of helping these poor people, who are so good, out of their difficulties, than of your gain. But I would also like to see you become very rich, since you spend it so well. And even this morning the thought came to me that you should not have your boys marry soon, so that you can do more for your own soul. If you begin to get entangled in other expenses, you won't have enough for everything. And, after all, this is the recompense you deserve for all the trouble you went through to earn it: to spend as much as you can in the service of the One ... who will give you his kingdom, which death cannot take away. His Majesty ...
2. ... interior spiritual trials you are much better prepared ... in both natural disposition and spirit. ... It's necessary always to show him much kindness, for he soon thinks he is being a bother. I don't know if I could assert that he is the person in my life to whom I am most indebted in every respect, for I began to be greatly enlightened by him, and so I am very fond of him. I am distressed he doesn't bear the trial sent him by the Lord over this lawsuit with greater courage, for I can't believe that it comes from some other source.
3. Pray that God will enlighten him so that he will not be upset. This is what happens when one is not detached from everything. That which could be for us the greatest gain (the loss of property, which lasts for so short a time and is so undeserving of esteem when compared to what is eternal) disturbs and deprives us of this very gain. We have to realize that anyone to whom God has not granted such a favor will receive no consolation from our speaking like this. Rather he will be consoled if he sees we are sorry about his affliction.
4. Today, while thinking of how God distributes his blessings as he wills, I was amazed that a man like this who has served God so sincerely for so many years should become afflicted about losing goods that he considered as belonging more to the poor than to himself. While I was thinking that this would matter little to me, I recalled how disturbed I became when, while we were in Seville, we learned that you were in danger of losing all that you had brought back with you. And so it is that we never know ourselves. Thus the best thing to do is to forsake all for the All. And then our human nature will not make us slaves of such base things. Those who cannot give up everything should reflect often on how we become the slaves of these things. You should do this too, and remember how your human nature drew you ...
