For Mother Prioress, María de San José.
1. Jesus be with your reverence. I don't have time to say all that I would like. Today the muleteer gave me your message. The longer your letters are the happier they make me. I have received so many letters today that there isn't even time to write this, nor have I had time to read the sisters' letters. Give them my best regards.
2. I already wrote you to tell you to accept Garciálvarez's sisters. It seems to me that my letter should have arrived. If they are so good, there is no reason for waiting. I am distressed that you are taking in so many nuns without any improvement in your financial picture. Try at least to get those 300 ducats that you are obliged to pay this year, for I assure you it bothers my conscience that you do not give poor Antonio Ruiz his money. He needs this for food for himself and for his livestock in Malagón. I'm already trying to find someone to help him out with more -- and this is my brother, although he will also benefit from so doing -- for I see that he has so little to count on there.
3. Even were the postulant recommended by Padre Nicolao not so perfect, I wouldn't send her away. Give him my regards and tell him that his cousin came to see me and sent an alms.
4. As for Pablo, I don't know what to say, for I still haven't understood well -- until I read the letter again -- why there is such a hurry before the year is up. If they give you 1500 ducats besides what they owe you for this year, give up the inheritance gladly. For these inheritances are never good for us because they end up amounting to nothing. And don't accept the inheritance, but he must take responsibility for that part which they are giving for the house. Don't let it enter your mind to take the inheritance. Say that you can't, that you are not allowed to have an income. Well, you shouldn't be writing me about these things; consider down there what's best for you to do. I wouldn't want anything to be withdrawn from that dowry or from Beatraiz's, but that the entire sum be given together. Otherwise I don't know how you can carry on with all that you have to pay every year, and instead of getting out of difficulties, you will lose a great deal. As for the lay sister, I will write to Valladolid to vouch for her and then write you again soon.
I am well.
The date is 8 November.
5. I will put the letters for our padre in an envelope without an address and with your name on it and two or three crosses; better two, or one, since the letters are numerous. And ask him not to address his letters to me but let you address them and mark them with the same sign. Doing this will conceal them better and make for a better plan than the one I had suggested. Please God you are speaking the truth when you say you are well, and remain with him.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
6. I have written you that your letters were given to my brother, and he was delighted with them. He is well, and the prioress of St. Joseph's remains the same.
