 
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. Last week while we were within the octave of All Saints, I wrote to you of how I rejoiced in receiving your letter, even though it was short, which was the last that I received. Regarding what you mentioned about writing to Rome, please God the result will be positive and that no other opinions will stand in the way.
2. I also mentioned how delighted I was with the letters you wrote to Padre Mariano which he sent me at my request. It's a story that made me give God much praise. I don't know how you are able to think up such ingenious tricks. May he be blessed who gives you such ability, for it seems to be his work. So, you must always consider carefully the favor God bestows on you and not go about trusting in yourself. I tell you that Buenaventura was so confident in himself that everything seemed easy (which scared me when I heard about it), yet it didn't do him any good.
3. This great God of Israel wants to be praised in his creatures. Thus we need to seek, as you do, what is for his honor and glory and be as diligent as we can not to seek any for ourselves. His Majesty will take care of us as he sees is fitting. What behooves us is that we understand our lowliness and that in that lowliness his grandeur be exalted. But how foolish I am, and how you will laugh, mi padre, when you read this! May God pardon those butterflies who enjoy so peacefully what I could not enjoy there except through much hardship. I can't help envying them, but it is a great joy for me that they are so diligently seeking to provide some relief for Paul, and so inconspicuously.
4. I have already written you many foolish counsels. If you wanted to get even with me, you would have to stop giving me the relief I find in your being able to get some relief for yourself, for you need it so badly in the midst of such great hardship. But my Paul has more virtue than this, and understands me better than before. That there be no occasion for failing in this understanding, I ask that you refuse to be my chaplain except for this purpose. This is so, for I tell you that if I had suffered all the trials involved in this foundation for no other reason, I would consider it to have been well worthwhile. And again it makes me praise the Lord that he granted me the favor of your having a place there where you can get your breath without being with seculars. Those sisters give me great pleasure, and you do me a great favor, by having them write with such detail, for they say you have given them orders to do so. It is a consolation for me to see that you don't forget me.
5. Doña Elena has combined her daughter's share of the inheritance with what she will bring as a dowry if she enters. And she says that the amount should be sufficient for accepting herself, two other nuns, and two lay sisters, and that after the work on the house is completed the remainder should be used for a pious foundation like that of Alba. The truth though is that she submits entirely to what Padre Baltasar Alvarez, you, and I decide. It was he who sent me this information, for he didn't want to respond before finding out what I would say. I paid careful attention to what I have seen as your will and so, after much reflection and discussion, I gave this enclosed response. If it doesn't seem right to you, let me know. Notice that I do not want to see the houses that were founded in poverty having an income.
May God keep watch over you.
Your unworthy daughter and servant,
Teresa of Jesus
