For Mother Prioress, María de San José.
1. Jesus be with you reverence. Always include on a small piece of paper a list of the things you want me to answer. Your letters are long -- although they don't seem so, because of the joy they give me; but if when in a hurry I have to read them all over in order to answer them, they do seem long.
2. I wrote you two, three, or four days ago that I would put two crosses on the letters for our padre but with your address. Let me know when you receive this message because I will not start doing this until then.
3. I tell you that I am very sorry about your fever. Why do you tell me that you are well? I'm bothered by that. But take care to see if it isn't caused by amenorrhea, and do something about it. Don't let it take root. I strongly suspect that it leaves you at times; this consoles me. I suggest you apply some ointments or things to mitigate the fever, and don't fail to tell the doctor. I think you usually have yourself bled every year. Perhaps this would benefit you, as the subprioress says. What I'm telling you is not to stay in the state you are in, waiting until it will be too late for a remedy. May God make you well.
4. I haven't heard anything from Malagón for days. I'm worried, and the doctors don't give me any hope for the prioress's return to health. All the signs and symptoms point to tuberculosis. God is life, and he can give it. Always keep praying for this -- also for a person to whom I owe a great deal -- and tell everyone to do so, and give them my regards, for their letters are a delight to me. I don't know if I will have a chance to answer them.
5. I tell you that I greatly envy all of you for the happy and peaceful way in which you enjoy the presence of our padre. I don't deserve such repose, and so I have no reason to complain. I am very glad that you have this relief, for if you didn't I don't know how you would be able to endure everything else. Nonetheless, I tell you to give orders to the subprioress in my name to subtract all the expenses from the forty ducats owed to St. Joseph's, and don't do otherwise, for you would be undergoing a loss. Consider what you spend as being taken care of here, and deduct from the debt whatever you spend on him. I laugh to myself thinking of how the good subprioress will include everything in the accounting, even the water. But she will be doing well, for that's what I want, except for the little gifts given as alms. I will become angry if you do otherwise.
6. You never tell me who his companion is. That's the only worry I have now, for I am very happy everything is going so well, without anyone's knowing about it. I wouldn't want it to be known in Los Remedios where he is eating, for that would open the door to what cannot be allowed for another superior. Believe me it's necessary to consider the future so that we don't have to answer to God for something we ourselves have started.
7. I am concerned to see how those nuns you are taking in are not of any help to you. Padre Garciálvarez will have received by now the letter in which I say that his relatives should be accepted. And I have written one to you that you should try to have them bring some money to help pay the interest, for that inheritance must not be worth anything. I wouldn't want you to wait until you don't know where to turn next, but that you provide for yourself before discovering that you are in water over your head. I accepted a nun in Salamanca who, they told me, was bringing a dowry from which I could have sent 300 ducats to Malagón to pay what you owe them and pay the hundred to Asensio Galiano, but she has not come. Pray that God will bring her to us. I tell you that you owe me a great deal for my desire to see you free of worry.
8. Why don't you try to give that money from Juana de la Cruz at once so as not to be so burdened with debt? Consider how this is not something to neglect. Try to get Anegas to bring what you need to pay Antonio Ruiz, for as I have mentioned you are obliged in conscience to give him what you owe him considering his present need.
9. As for Pablo, I reread what concerned him. You mustn't let him think that you want his daughter, but that he should give up trying to have her enter. And realize that this is better for many reasons, for these business people have a lot of money one day, and the next day they lose it all. How much more so since parents look after those who are close to them, and little is left over. What is more fitting is that he pay you all that he still owes you for the house, if it amounts to 1500 ducats, and don't accept an inheritance or agree on a lesser amount. If you can get more from him, get it. Try to find someone who will tell him not to upset his children by leaving their inheritance to a monastery. Even if he gave 2,000 ducats, it would not be a lot.
10. They say that the mother of the Portuguese girl could give the dowry. I think that would be worth more than the others. Well, you will not be in want. At the moment you least expect, God will send you someone who will bring more than you want. It wouldn't be bad if that chaplain were to take responsibility for the major chapel. Don't fail to send him some gifts to show your gratitude, even though there be no occasion for doing so.
11. Before I forget, you ought to know that I learned here of some mortifications that are being performed in Malagón. The prioress will suddenly give an order that a sister be slapped by another. They got this notion from here. It seems the devil is teaching them under the guise of perfection to put souls in danger of offending God. By no means should you command or consent that any nun give another a slap (they also say pinches are given). Do not guide the nuns with the rigor you saw at Malagón, for they are not slaves. Mortification should be used only for one's growth. I tell you, my daughter, that it's necessary that you be very careful about what these little prioresses dream up. The things that I am now finding out! How this afflicts me! May God make you a saint, amen.
12. My brother is well, and Teresa too. The letter you wrote him in which you spoke of the four reales was not received; all the other letters were. He is delighted with them, and cherishes them more than the ones he gets from here.
Today is 11 November, and I am yours,
Teresa of Jesus
13. Try to get our padre to respond to the business matters I am writing him about in the enclosed letter. I mean that you insist with him that he not forget.
