1. In a way, even though it deeply grieved me, it caused me profound devotion to observe, on the other hand, the tact you are using amid so many calumnies. I tell you, padre, God loves you very much and you are doing well in your imitation of him. Rejoice since he is giving you what you ask of him, which are trials, for which he will repay you because he is just. May he be blessed forever.
2. In what regards that girl or woman, I am convinced that it is due not so much to melancholy as to the devil. He is the one putting the woman up to those lies. He is trying to see if he can fool you in some way, now that he has fooled her. So you must proceed with great discretion in this matter and by no means go to her house. May what happened to Santa Marina (I believe it was) not happen to you, for they claimed a child was hers, and she suffered much. Now is not the time for you to be suffering in a matter like this. In my poor opinion you should set this matter aside, for there are others who might win over this soul, and there are many others toward whom you can be helpful.
3. Remember, padre, that if she didn't give you that letter under the seal of confession or in confession, it is a matter for the Inquisition, and the devil has a thousand snares. I have learned that someone else died in the Inquisition prison for the same reason. Truly I don't believe she gave the letter to the devil -- for he wouldn't have returned it so quickly -- or all that she says. But I believe she must be lying in some way -- God forgive me -- and enjoys seeing you. Perhaps I am calumniating her, but I would like to see you far away from where she is so that you can more easily protect yourself.
4. How malicious I am! But everything is necessary in this life. Don't try to straighten out a matter that's been going on for four months. Be careful, it's very dangerous. Let them fend for themselves. If there is anything to accuse her of in this regard (I mean outside of confession), be careful, because I fear there will be more publicity and they will blame you afterward, saying that you knew about it and were silent. But I'm aware that my saying this is foolish because you already know it ...
