To the Very Illustrious Doña Luisa de la Cerda, my lady.
1. May Jesus be with you, my lady and friend. However much this Doña Luisa may travel, she is still my lady. I have told Antonia to write to you about all that is happening, in regard both to my poor health and all the rest. My head is in such a condition that only God knows how I can write this. But knowing that you and my lords have arrived in good health so consoles me that my writing these lines is not taking much effort. May the Lord be blessed for everything; I prayed a great deal for all of you. I'm also much consoled that you are happy with your monastery. And I find that you are right, for I know that our Lord is genuinely served there. May it please him that the nuns serve you as they ought. And may our Lord keep you and allow me to see you again, since I did not die.
2. With regard to the book, you have worked everything out so well that it couldn't have been done better. So I'm forgetting all the anger this caused me. Master Avila wrote to me at length, and he is satisfied with everything. He says only that some things should be explained further and that some terms should be changed. This will be easy to do. You have done a good work; the Lord will repay you for this and for the other favors and good deeds you have done for me. I greatly rejoiced in receiving such good news, for this is an important matter. One recognizes who it was who counseled that the book be sent.
3. I would very much like to write to Padre Pablo Hernández, but I'm really not able to do so. I think I'll be rendering him a greater service if I do not make myself sick. I beg you to tell him about what's going on here that he might pray to the Lord for me and for all these business matters, for I do the same for him. I also beg you to send Sister Antonia's letter to the prioress of Malagón along with this one, if you do not object. Otherwise, have someone write her that she should not become involved in the matter that I wrote about in a letter sent to her through Miguel, for the general has written to me again, and it seems that things will be going better. Note that it's very important you give her this message.
4. I kiss the hands of Señor Don Juan and my ladies many times. I welcome them back and also you; your return, I repeat, has made me happy. Give my best regards to Señor Don Hernando and Señora Doña Ana, and also to Alonso de Cabria and Alvaro del Lugo. You already know that with me you must lose something of your noble status and gain in humility. May it please the Lord that I might see you again, for I surely want to. My health and everything else I do fare better in your region than up here.
5. With regard to moving, it's important to be very careful about choosing a healthy site, as you can see from what's happening to us here because of the unhealthy location, even though the house is very pleasant.
6. I was happy that you gave an alms to that young girl. When it comes to your desire, you ought not bother about whether there is room or not, for everything belongs to you. Señora Doña María de Mendoza kisses your ladyship's hands many times. Before I had read to her what you wanted me to tell her, she begged me to convey this to you. She is not at home now. I will pass on what you wanted me to tell her, for she truly deserves it. Tell me whatever you think appropriate concerning the licentiate, our Padre Velasco, and remain with God. May he grant you all that I desire for you, amen.
Today is the day following the feast of All Saints.
Your ladyship's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
