For Madre María de San José, prioress in Seville.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with you, my daughter. I received your letter written on 3 November. I tell you that your letters never tire me but give me rest from other tiring things. I was amused that you spelled out the date. Please God you didn't do so to avoid humbling yourself by putting it down in numbers.
2. Before I forget, the letter to Padre Mariano is very good, if it were not for that Latin. God deliver all my daughters from presuming to be Latinists. May you never try doing so again or permit other nuns to try. I desire much more that you dare to appear simple, which is very characteristic of saints, rather than so eloquent. This is what you get for sending me your letters open. But now since you have gone to confession to our padre, you will be more mortified. Tell him that I almost made a general confession the other day to the one I mentioned, and I didn't experience a twentieth of the sorrow I experienced when I had to confess to him. See what an ugly temptation this is!
3. Pray for my present confessor who has been a great consolation to me, for it is no small matter for me to be satisfied in this regard. Oh, how well you acted in not calling on the confessor who tormented me so much down there! I wasn't happy in that place with anything. If our padre was a source of happiness, you well know how many anxieties went along with it. And the happiness that you could have given me, if you had so wished, because I find your company delightful, you refused to offer. I am glad that you now understand my affection. As for the other one from Caravaca, may God forgive her, she is sorry now also. Such is the power that truth has.
4. Today she sent me a habit made of coarse wool and it's the most suited to our purposes that I've worn -- very light. I was deeply grateful to her, for my other one was too worn out to protect me from the cold. And they themselves made the material for the undertunics, although here there is no mention at all of undertunics during the whole summer, and they do much fasting. Now I am beginning to be a nun. Pray that this will last.
5. I sent word to my brother that you have the money. He'll send the muleteer from Avila to get it. You do well not to send it without a letter from him. Take care to remind our padre to take up the matter with the duke that he mentioned to me. With his having so much business to attend to and being so alone, I don't know where he finds the energy, if not -- through a miracle -- from God. I don't think it even entered my mind to say that he not eat there at the monastery, for I see that the need is great. I only say that outside meal times he not go there often, lest this be noticed and he be prevented from ever going there. Rather you are doing me a great favor by the diligence you use to provide for his comfort. I will never be able to repay you. Tell this to the sisters, for also my Gabriela was happy to tell me about this in her letter. Give my regards to her and to all the sisters and all my friends. Give my special greetings to Padre Antonio de Jesús. We are praying that he will benefit from the treatment he is undergoing. I have been sorry for him and so has the prioress. Also give my regards to Fray Gregorio and Fray Bartolomé.
6. The prioress of Malagón is even worse than she usually is. Yet I am somewhat consoled, for I'm told that the source of the pain is not in the lungs and that she does not have tuberculosis. And Ana de la Madre de Dios, the nun who is here, says that she was in that same condition and that she got well. God can do it. I don't know what to say about all the trials that God has given them there. Besides the illnesses they are destitute; they have neither wheat nor money but a world of debts. Please God the 400 ducats that Salamanca owes them, and were reserved for this house -- for I already spoke to our padre about it -- will be enough to take care of the situation. I have already sent a part of the amount. Their expenses have been high and of many kinds. For this reason I would not want the prioresses of houses having an income to be very prodigal, nor any of the others either, for they will end up by losing everything.
7. The whole burden lies on poor Beatriz, the only one who is well. And she has been entrusted by the prioress with charge of the house. For want of good men, as they say ... I am very happy that you are not in want of them there. Don't be foolish in not noting the cost of postage and everything else I tell you to note. You would be losing so much, and it's foolishness. I am sorry that his companion is Fray Andrés, for I don't believe he knows how to keep quiet, and I'm even more sorry that he eats at El Carmen. For love of God tell him to be careful, and he would be tempting God to go elsewhere than Los Remedios on leaving there. May God watch over you and all the nuns and make you saints, for I have many more letters to write.
Today is 19 November.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
8. Turn over. I have already mentioned that I received the letters among which were those from the Indies and Avila. I would like to know who gave them to you, so as to respond, and when the armada is leaving.
9. I am delighted that you bear poverty so well and that God so provides for your needs. May he be blessed forever. You did very well to give the tunics to our padre, for I have no need of them. What we all need most is that you not allow him to eat with those people, and that he be on his guard, for God is doing us such a favor by giving him health in the midst of so many trials. With regard to using linen and wool mixed together, I would prefer that you wear linen when necessary. Otherwise you would be opening the door to never observing the constitutions well. The material you would end up with would be almost as hot, and you would be observing neither one rule nor the other, and the custom will have begun.
10. I am troubled by what you say about how the rule stating that stockings be made of coarse cloth or rough tow is not observed. Tell our padre some time that where the rule speaks of stockings no indication should be given about the material other than that it be poor, and let me know what he says; or better, that nothing be said at all about the material, but that it simply mention stockings. And don't forget. Get him to delay his visitation of the province as much as you can, until it is seen where some things will end up. Have you noticed how charming his letter to Teresita is? There is no end to the talk about her and her virtue. Julián speaks wonders of her, which is no small matter. Read the letter that Isabel wrote to his paternity.
