1. Jesus be with you, my daughter. On the feast of the Presentation of Our Lady two letters of yours were delivered to me along with those from our padre. Never fail to tell me something just because you think his paternity is telling me about it, for in fact he doesn't, and I am surprised that he writes to me at all with everything else he has to do. The letters you sent by way of Madrid, which contain the memorandum or note that tells about the commotion that has taken place, have not arrived. I don't think any of my letters were lost except the first packet where I told you about my Isabelita having received the habit and the happy moments I spent with her mother. Since there was also a letter there from the prioress and the sisters that presented some questions to our padre, and he has not answered, I think they were lost. Let me know through the next mail carrier. I mentioned that when I laughingly asked Isabelita if she were married, she answered very seriously that she was. I asked her with whom, and she answered at once, "with our Lord Jesus Christ."
2. I became very envious of those who went to Paterna, and it wasn't because they went with our padre. When I saw that their going there meant suffering, I forgot about the rest. Please God it will be a beginning for how he may use us. There are so few down there that I don't think they will suffer much, except from hunger, for I am told they don't have enough food to eat. May God be with them, for we have urgently begged him about this up here. Send them this letter through a very reliable messenger, and send me any of theirs you have so that I may see how things are going. Always write and encourage and counsel them. It's a harsh trial to be so alone. In no way do I think they should sing anything until their number increases, for this would bring discredit on all. I am delighted that Garciálvarez's aspirants have good voices. You ought to accept them with whatever they bring because you are few in number.
3. I am astounded by the absurdity of allowing the confessor to bring along with him any other confessor he wants. What a nice custom that would become! Since I have not seen the note from our padre, I cannot say anything. I had thought of writing to Garciálvarez to ask him that when he needs counsel he should not go to spiritual masters but search out some truly learned men, for these latter have rescued me from many troubles. I am not surprised about the sufferings of which you speak, for I have suffered much because they told me the devil was behind my experiences. So that you may see what I write to him, I will send the letter unsealed and you can send it to the prior of Las Cuevas. If you can speak to Acosta, I think that will be better. Read that letter and send it to him.
4. It would be no small blessing if the rector there would agree to take you under his care, and so he would be a great help in many matters. But the Fathers of the Society want to be obeyed, and so you have to do so. Even though sometimes what they say may not be to our liking, it's worth putting up with for the sake of the importance of having them with us. Think up questions to ask them, for they like to answer questions. And they are right in wanting to do well whatever they undertake. And they do so whenever they undertake a charge like this. In that chaos, this is something that takes on great importance, for when our padre leaves, you will be very much alone.
5. It never crossed my mind to want you to accept Nicolao's aspirant for any other reason than that I think you have a great need of money. If the 1,000 ducats from the relatives of Garciálvarez were in currency, it would be all right. It is good that they have to wait, although you shouldn't fail to accept them for reasons of money, in my opinion.
6. I was amused by the motive for which they are sending me to the Indies. May God pardon them. The best thing they can do is say so many things all at once that no one will believe them. I have already written you not to send the money to my brother until he writes to you. Try to get our padre to do what Acosta tells him with respect to the one who will be appointed the next rector of the Society, which will be soon. I entreated Salazar -- for he was here and is going to Granada and says he may possibly go to Seville -- to speak to the provincial down there. If he should come, be very gracious to him and speak to him about whatever you might wish. You can do so for he is a real gentleman.
7. The prioress of Malagón is better, glory to God, and I am much more confident about her health, for a doctor has told me that if the lesion is not in the lungs she will live. May God provide since he sees our need. Don't fail to pray for this. Recommend me to the prayers of all the nuns, and remain with the Lord, for I have many letters to write. On another day I will write the prior of Las Cuevas, for I am delighted about the improvement in his health. May God preserve him for us; and may he preserve you, too, my daughter, for you never tell me that you are well. That worries me. Give Delgado and all the others my best.
Today is 26 November.
Your servant,
Teresa of Jesus
8. Always let me know how Padre Fray Antonio is. Regards to him, to Fray Gregorio and Fray Bartolomé. I give much praise to our Lord upon seeing what our padre is doing. May God be pleased to give him health. I hope in God that my daughters will fulfill their duties well.
