1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. Not long ago I answered your letters, which are not as many as mine to you. You have never written about the procedure our padre follows in making a visitation. Would you be kind enough to do this for me. Please God it is being carried out according to the plan that our padre says is used by the archbishop's visitator and by himself for his nuns; this would be most beneficial. Considering his earnest zeal, it would be impossible for His Majesty not to help him.
2. I greatly desire to know how my nuns in Paterna are doing. I believe they must be doing very well, and considering the news our padre will give you that Tostado is not going to be allowed to proceed, the reform promoted by the discalced nuns will not stop with this monastery alone. May God watch over our padre, for it seems miraculous the way things are going.
3. I was very pleased with the statement written by our padre concerning Garciálvarez, for there is nothing else that would have to be added to it. I haven't heard who was appointed rector. Please God he will be of the same mind as Padre Acosta. Since I wrote to you about this previously, I will not speak of it now or add anything, nor would I know what to say.
4. I didn't hear anything more about the prioress of Malagón since I last wrote, for they told me then that she had improved. Nor have I heard anything about Antonio Ruiz who had another relapse, but I believe that had he died I would have heard by now.
5. My best regards to all those daughters of mine, and remain with God, for I have nothing more to say. I'm enclosing this letter that you may have news about your Teresa and pray for her. May His Majesty watch over you.
6. Alberta has written to Doña Luisa and sent her a cross. I haven't written to her yet -- it's amazing how she delights in any little attention from her nuns -- nor to Doña Guiomar who is now married. Don't be a thankless one, and remain with God.
Today is 3 December 1576.
Your servant,
Teresa of Jesus
