For Madre María de San José, prioress of Seville.
1. Jesus be with your reverence. Today, the vigil of the Immaculate Conception, the muleteer sent me your letters and is in a hurry for the reply. So, you will have to forgive me, daughter, if this is so short, for I wouldn't in any way want to be short with you, for whom my affection is great -- I certainly love you much. And now I am so obliged because of the care you take to provide our padre with every comfort, as he tells me; thus my love for you has even grown greater. And I am happy that you are doing this with such prudence, for I believe that neither now nor ever will there be another with whom we can deal in this way. Since the Lord chose him for these beginning stages, which are exceptional, I don't think there will be another like him. All that which serves to open doors will end up in something worse than can be imagined when superiors are not like him. But neither will there be so much need for caution, because now, as in a time of war, we need to proceed with more care. May God reward you, my daughter, for the care you take with your letters, which are a source of life for me.
2. This week I received all three that you said you had written. And even though they came all together, they are more than welcome. I was much moved by the letter from San Francisco, which is good enough to be published. What our padre is doing seems unbelievable. Blessed be God who gave him so much talent. I would like to have great talent so as to be able to give the Lord due thanks for the favors he grants us and for what he has done in giving our padre to us for a father.
3. I see from here, my daughter, the trial and loneliness you are all going through. Please God, the illness of Mother Subprioress will not be serious; I would be sorry even on account of the increased burden it would be for you. I was most happy that you benefited from the bloodletting. If that doctor has understood you, I wouldn't want any other to be taking care of you.
4. Today they brought me the enclosed letter from the prioress of Malagón. For some time now she has not got worse. Everything I can do for her health and happiness, I do. For apart from all that I owe her, her health is very important to me. But yours is much more so, believe me without a doubt. You can imagine from this how much I want you to be well!
5. From the enclosed note you will see that Mariano received your letter. I've already written you about the one he refers to from my brother, for I think I tore that one up with some other letters. It was still open, and that must be what happened. I was very upset and made a great effort to find it, for it was a wonderful letter. Now he has written me to tell me he has sent you a letter with the muleteer from Avila. Thus, I'll say nothing about him except that his soul is making good progress in prayer and that he gives away a great deal in alms. Pray always for him and for me as well, and remain with God, my daughter.
6. I was much more upset to learn that the prior there is not carrying out his office well than about his pusillanimity. Our padre ought also to frighten him by pointing out what is wrong with him, which he will do, as is his custom. My regards to all, and to Fray Gregorio especially, and to Nicolao if he hasn't left, and to those daughters of mine. My greetings to Gabriela for her letters and to the subprioress. Oh if I could give you some of the extra nuns from up here! But God will provide them for you. I've already asked about the fleet. I well understand the burden that you have there, for I am worried about it, but I hope that God will take care of everything and that your health will last. May His Majesty watch over you and make you very holy, amen.
7. I am delighted that you are beginning to recognize what you have there in our padre. I was aware of this already in Beas. Some letters from down there and from Caravaca arrived today. I am enclosing the one from Caravaca so that our padre may read it, and you also. Return it to me with this same muleteer, for I need it because of what it says about the dowries. In the letter written to the prioress she complains much about you.
8. Now I must send to Caravaca a statue of Our Lady that I got for them. It's large and beautiful, and not yet attired. And they are making one of St. Joseph for me that won't cost the nuns anything. You are carrying out your office very well, and you did more than very well to inform me about the pinching, the pathetic customs left over from the Incarnation.
Today is -- I've already told you.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
9. Our padre answered me very well about everything and sent the official permissions I asked for. Kiss his hands for me.
