1. Jesus be with your paternity, mi padre. Oh, what a good day I had today, for Padre Mariano has sent me all your letters! There's no need for you to tell him to do so, for he does it in response to my request. And even though they arrive late, they are a great consolation to me. But still you do me a great charity when you write telling me the substance of what is going on; for as I say those other letters arrive late, although when he receives one for me, he sends it on at once. We are very good friends.
2. I was moved to praise the Lord for the manner and grace and, above all, perfection with which you write. Oh, mi padre, what majesty lies in your words when you write about perfection and what consolation they bring to my soul! Even if we were not faithful to God for the good that comes from this, but were so only on account of the authority he confers on others (and the greater the authority the more faithful), our gain would be most great. It seems clear that you are on good terms with His Majesty. May He be blessed for everything, for he grants me so many favors and gives you so much light and strength. I will never be able to serve him enough.
3. The letter you wrote me from Trigueros about Tostado was excellent, and you did well to tear up those that were delivered to you with requests. Well, mi padre, God is helping you and teaching you with all clarity, as they say. Have no fear of failing in your great undertaking. Oh, how I envy you and Padre Fray Antonio because of the sins you prevent, and here I am with only desires!
4. Let me know on what grounds the accusation was made against the nun who is a virgin and bearing a child. I think a charge like that is the greatest stupidity. But none could match the one you wrote me about the other day. Do you think it is a small favor the Lord grants you to be able to bear these things the way you do? I tell you he is repaying you for the services you are rendering him down there. This will not be your only reward.
5. I am frightened by all the adversity, especially about the Masses, for I went to the choir to ask God's help for those souls. It isn't possible that God would allow so much evil to increase, now that he has begun to reveal it. Every day I am learning more about the fruit of prayer and the value before God of a soul that for God's honor alone seeks help for others. Believe me, mi padre, I think the desire is being accomplished for which these monasteries were founded, which was to pray to God to help those who struggle for his honor and service, since we women count for nothing. When I consider the perfection of these nuns, I am not surprised by what they obtain from God.
6. I was delighted to see the letter that the prioress of Paterna wrote you and the skill God gives you in everything. I hope in God the nuns will do much good, and I felt a great desire that these foundations continue to be made. I've already written to you about one, concerning which the prioress in Medina writes in the enclosed letter. It's not 1,000 ducats that she is giving but 600. It could be, now, that the donor is keeping the rest. I discussed this matter with Doctor Velázquez because I had a scruple about dealing with it against the general's will. He insisted that I try to get Doña Luisa to write to the ambassador and ask him to obtain permission from the general. He offered to give the information that needed to be presented and said that if the general doesn't give it, permission should be sought from the pope, informing him that these houses are mirrors for Spain. This is what I am planning to do unless you think otherwise.
7. I answered requesting that they write me again about the way in which this money was given. I have already written to Maestro Ripalda, who is now rector in Burgos and a great friend of mine from the Society, that he inquire for me and let me know, and that I would send someone there, if fitting, to see the place and begin the negotiations. So, if it seems all right to you, Antonio Gaytán and Julián de Avila could go when the good weather comes. You can send them the authorization and they will be able to make the foundation as they did in Caravaca without my having to go. Even if more nuns are taken for the purpose of reforming other houses, there are enough to go around as long as the number in the houses is small, as is the case down there. In others, where the nuns are more numerous, I think more than two should go, and even down there I do not regret their letting a lay sister go, for they have them, and what truly fine ones!
8. I am certain that no remedy exists for monasteries of nuns if there is not someone behind the doors to watch over them. The Incarnation is now something to praise God for. Oh, what a desire I have to see all of the nuns free from the jurisdiction of the calced friars. I will dedicate my life to our being made a separate province, because all the harm comes from our not being separate, and there is no remedy. For although other monasteries are relaxed, they are not so to such an extreme. I mean those subject to the friars, for it's a terrible thing with those subject to the ordinaries. And if superiors realized what their responsibilities are and took the care that you do, matters would go otherwise. And it would be no small mercy from God that there be so many prayers offered by good souls for his church.
9. I think what you say about the habits is very good, and one year from now you can give them to all the nuns. Once it's done, it's done, for all the clamor lasts for only a few days. And if some are punished the others will remain silent, for women on the whole are timid. Those novices should not remain there, for goodness' sake, for they would have such a bad beginning. It's very important that we have success with this monastery, for it is the first. I tell you that if you think they are your friends they are repaying you with their deeds.
10. I approve of the severity used by our Padre Fray Antonio. Understand, then, that with some it would not be harmful to so act, and this is very important, for I know them. Perhaps more than one sin of the tongue will be avoided and they will even become more submissive. Gentleness must be accompanied by severity -- this is the way God leads us -- and for those very determined individuals there is no other remedy. And I repeat that those poor discalced nuns are very much alone, for if one of them gets sick it will be a severe trial. God will give them health since he sees the need.
11. All your daughters here are doing well, except for those in Beas who are being killed by lawsuits. But it is no serious thing that they suffer something, since the foundation was made without much trouble. I will never have better days than those I had there with my Paul. I was pleased that he wrote me as "your dear son"; and how quickly I said (being alone), "He is right!" I was delighted to hear it, and I would be even more delighted if matters down there proceeded so well that he could return to care for matters up here which I hope will be entrusted to his care.
12. I am distressed over the sickness of the prioress there, for it would be hard to find another one like her for that post. Make sure she gets good care and that she takes something for that continual fever. Oh, how well I get on with my confessor! To make me do some penance he obliges me to eat more every day than I usually do and to pamper myself.
13. My Isabel is here. She asks how you can joke with her so much as not to answer her. I gave her a little melon; and she told me it was very cold, that it deafens her throat. I tell you she uses the most delightful expressions, and she's always happy, with a gentle disposition that reminds me very much of mi padre. May God watch over him much more than me, amen, amen.
Your Reverence's daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
14. You should know that the nuns down there have a strange fear of the prioress, and also the custom of never saying anything precise to their superiors. The students who serve them must be watched. May God keep you.
