For Mother María de San José, Carmelite prioress.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. Until you write that your fever is gone, I will be worried about you. Be careful that it doesn't turn into jaundice, which can happen where there is anemia. Although there was hardly ever any occasion for me to contract this illness, I have suffered much from it. The cure consisted of some aromatic fumigations with vetch and coriander leaves and egg shells and a little oil and a little bit of rosemary and a little lavender, which I inhaled while lying in bed. I assure you that I recovered. This is only for you; I think it would be good if you tried it sometime. I once suffered from fevers for eight months, and with this remedy they went away.
2. I do not tire of thanking God that little Blase was there on the night the good old woman died. May the Lord take her to himself, as we have begged him here. I don't think there will be any need to console her sister or niece. Give them my regards and tell them they are right in being happy that she has gone to enjoy God. But Beatriz must not be desiring the same, for she should be careful that she doesn't commit a sin with such foolishness. You did me a great favor by writing such a detailed account of all this, and I rejoice that you have received so good an inheritance. It doesn't seem to me that the devil has afflicted you down there with the pusillanimity he did me, for now I see that it was he; up here I have returned to the way I felt before. What is this that the good prior of Las Cuevas is writing to Padre Mariano that he try to get a trickle of water for you? I don't know how he could succeed, although it would certainly make me very happy. He puts as much effort into the matter as he would if it were for himself. Blessed be God that he is in good health; I'm going to write to him.
3. Many regards to all the nuns, and to my Gabriela, for her letters are a delight to me. Let me know whether she is a good turn sister, and don't forget to give my greetings to Delgada, and tell me whether Fray Bartolomé de Aguilar is well. I don't know how you can be sick since you have our padre there. Each day God gives with both ... etc.
4. Peru is where my brother is, although by now I believe he has moved further on. I will find out from Lorenzo. But in regard to what you have to do down there, remember that he doesn't have an established residence, because he is not yet married, and he is in a place one day, and gone the next, as they say. I sent your letter to my brother, Lorenzo. If you have told him what country this man of whom you speak is from, perhaps he will know to whom you can recommend him. Try to find out about this and write to me when you do.
5. It would be only right to pay for the house with Beatriz's dowry, for she played a part, I believe, in our being sent down there. Always tell Gabriela to keep me informed on how things are going in Paterna so that you don't have to tire yourself. It's no surprise that they have little peace. Ask mi padre if it wouldn't be good for Margarita to go there and join them, for she would certainly have the courage. It seems to me they are very isolated, and I think she could make profession (although I don't remember when she received the habit). If one of the two sisters were to become sick it would be a rough situation, and you are not in want of lay sisters. May God be with you, amen.
Today is the feast of St. Lucy.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
6. From the enclosed letter you will see how the prioress of Malagón is doing; it is from her doctor.
7. Read the two other enclosed letters. So that you don't do what I am advising San Francisco, I'm sending them to you open; close them. If Father Prior gives you any pictures for me, don't take any of them for yourself; he will give you as many as you want down there.
