1. ... I will be happy if she leaves it to him as she did the rest. Be careful how you speak to her about all this that I am writing to you, for she will tell her mother, and this will look bad after the letter I've written to Don Pedro. You can easily tell her that she should leave it to his conscience; otherwise I would not interfere in the matter, as is true.
2. I am amused that Doctor Velázquez thinks that Don Pedro should not take it upon his conscience, while as usual there will be someone to tell Don Pedro that he can do so. Those who think the Fathers of the Society are being moved by their own interests are so displeased that they have thought it good for him to act in this way. Don Pedro is more considerate of my reputation than you because he is delivering me from getting involved. May God pardon and watch over you for me and give you many happy years.
3. I am always concerned that you not displease Señora Doña María.
4. We are doing well. I sent your letter to Father Provincial in which you say that Doña María now wants her to renounce her possessions in favor of the house. I don't know what to say about this world, for where there is a question of self-interest there is no holiness, and this makes me want to abhor everything in it. I don't know why you are getting a Theatine mixed up in all this (for Catalina tells me that Mercado is one), since you know their own interests are at stake. Prádanos has pleased me very much; I believe he is a man of great perfection. May God give perfection to us also, and to them their money.
5. My regards to all and especially to Casilda, and hurry on with her profession. Don't delay any longer, for it's enough to kill her. I will send your letter to Father Provincial. I well imagined that Doña María was waiting for those from Don Pedro for the sake of her own business affairs. This displeased me very much. Do you think I told him about it? I don't think so; saying yes would make me feel a scruple. After all, since you have a superior, I believe it would be better for you not to renounce anything until you get his opinion. So don't pay attention to what I have said other than to draw light about what would be more fitting. I would not want to impose this on you, for you have enough trials. Write about it all to Padre Maestro, and through Arellano, the Dominican, you could let me know whether she is calm. Señora Doña María will have him come ...
