1. Jesus be with your honor. Serna allows me so little time that I did not want to go on at length, but when I begin writing to you -- and since Serna comes so seldom -- I need time.
2. Do not read the letters I write to Francisco, for I fear that he is somewhat melancholic and is doing a lot by being open with me. Perhaps God gives him those scruples to detach him from other things. Fortunately, for his good, he is able to believe me.
3. Clearly, I didn't send the paper, although I was wrong in not telling you. I gave it to a sister to copy, and I have not been able to find it. Until they send another copy from Seville, there is no way I can send it to you.
4. I think by now they will have given you a letter I sent by way of Madrid, but in case it has been lost I will have to repeat what I said there. I regret having to spend time doing so. First, look over that house you have rented belonging to Hernán Alvarez de Peralta. I think I have heard it mentioned that in one of the rooms the walls are ready to cave in. Be very careful.
5. Second, send the small chest and any other of my papers that may have been in the bundles, for it seems to me there was a bag containing papers. Have them sent to me well sewn. If Doña Quiteria through Serna sends a parcel that she needs to send, they will easily fit inside. Add my seal also, for I can't bear using this seal with the skull. I prefer the one with the monogram of him whom I would like to have engraved on my heart as had St. Ignatius. Don't let anyone open the chest, unless it's yourself, for I think the writing on prayer is in there, and don't tell anyone what you find in it. Be on guard, for I don't give you permission to do this, nor would it be fitting. Even though it may seem to you that this would render service to God, I forbid it because of other disadvantages that would result. Enough said, for were I to learn that you tell someone, I would never let you read anything again.
6. The nuncio has asked me to send him copies of the patent letters authorizing me to found these houses, and an account of how many there are, and where, and how many nuns, and from where, their age, and how many I think have the qualities for being prioress. The lists of these things are in the chest, or maybe in the bag. Well, I need everything that is there. They say he wants it so as to set up the province. I fear, instead, that he may want our nuns to reform other monasteries, for he has spoken of this previously, and such a thing would not be good for us, except for monasteries of our order. Tell this to the subprioress, and tell her to send me the names of those who are in that house, the ages of those who are there now, and how long they have been nuns. This should be done with good handwriting in a small notebook, and signed with her name.
7. Now it occurs to me that I am prioress there and that I can do it, and so it is not necessary that she sign it but only send me the information, even if in her handwriting, for I can copy it. There is no reason for the nuns to know about this. You take care of how this is to be sent so that the papers aren't in danger of getting wet, and send the key.
8. That which I said is in the book is in the one where I treat of the Paternoster. There you will find much about the prayer you are experiencing, although not to the extent in which it is explained in the other book. It seems to me it is found in the section on Adveniat regnum tuum. Read it again, at least the part on the Paternoster. Perhaps you will find something that satisfies you.
9. Before I forget, how could you make a vow without telling me? That's a nice kind of obedience! This troubled me, although your determination pleased me. But what you did seemed to be dangerous. Inquire about this, for that which is a venial sin could become a mortal sin on account of the promise. I will also ask my confessor who is a most learned man. And it seems to me foolish, for what I promised carried with it certain conditions. I would not dare promise what you did, for I know that even the apostles committed venial sins. Only our Lady was free from them. I am sure that God accepted your intention, but it would seem to me wise for you to have the vow commuted at once for something else. If it can be done by means of a bull, do so immediately. This jubilee year would be a good occasion for doing so. God deliver us from committing ourselves to something in which it is so easy to fail without our hardly even being aware of it. If God hasn't charged you with a greater fault, it is because he knows our nature well. In my opinion you should correct this situation at once, and don't make any more vows, for it's a dangerous thing. It doesn't seem to me to be inappropriate to speak at times about your prayer with your confessors, for, after all, they are close at hand and they can give you better counsel about everything, and nothing would be lost.
10. Your being sorry that you have bought La Serna is the work of the devil who doesn't want you to be grateful to God for the favor he granted you in this regard, which was great. Be convinced that it is the best you could do from many viewpoints, and you are providing your children with something more than property, which is honor. Nobody hears about your purchase without thinking that you were most fortunate. And do you think there is no work in collecting rent? You would be spending all your time in property seizures. Consider this a temptation; don't pay any heed to it, but praise God for what you bought, and don't think that if you had more time your prayer would go better. Make no mistake about this, for time well spent, like looking after your children's property, does not hurt prayer. God often gives more in a short moment than in a long time. His works are not measured by time.
11. Try, then, after these feast days are over to devote some time to getting all the records in suitable order. And what you spend on La Serna will be well spent, and when summer comes you will be happy to go and spend some days there. Jacob did not become less a saint for tending his flock, nor Abraham, nor St. Joachim. When we try to avoid work, everything tires us. That's the way it goes for me, and for this reason God wills that I be always loaded down with many things to do. Discuss all these things with Francisco de Salcedo, for in these temporal matters I willingly let him stand in my stead.
12. It is a great favor from God that you tire of what others find restful, but not for this reason should you renounce it. We have to serve God as he wishes and not as we wish. The livestock business is what in my opinion you can disregard. For this reason I am somewhat happy that you have given up the business with Antonio Ruiz that was based on profit. For even in the eyes of the world one suffers some little loss through such dealings. I think it would be better for you to be moderate in almsgiving, for God has given you food and what you need to give alms, but not a lot. I do not call what you want to do at La Serna the livestock business, for it is something very good; it is not what I call a business. I've already told you that in all these matters you should follow the opinion of Francisco de Salcedo, and you will no longer have such ideas. And always give my best regards to him and anyone else you choose, and to Pedro de Ahumada to whom I would like to have time to write so that he might answer, for his letters are a delight to me.
13. Tell Teresa not to fear that I love anyone as much as I do her and that she should distribute the holy pictures, except those I put aside for myself, and that she give some to her brothers. I long to see her. I was moved by what you wrote about her to Seville. They sent me your letters, which filled the sisters with joy when I read them in recreation, and me too. Whoever would take away gallantry from my brother would be taking away his life. Everything seems to him good, since his gallantry is put into practice for saints, for I believe these nuns are saints. In every instance they put me to shame.
14. We had a great feast yesterday for the Holy Name of Jesus; may God reward you. I don't know what to send you for all you do for me except these carols I composed, for my confessor gave me orders to bring some happiness to the sisters. I spent the past evenings with them, and I didn't know how to bring them joy except with these. They have a delightful sound -- it would be nice if Francisquito could sing them. See if I'm not making good progress! Nonetheless, the Lord has granted me many favors during these days.
15. I am amazed by those he is granting you. May he be blessed forever. I understand why devotion is desired, which is good. It is one thing to desire it and another to ask for it. But I believe that what you are doing is the best. Leave it all to God and leave your interests in his hands. He knows what is fitting for us, but always strive to journey along the path I wrote you about. Realize that it is more important than you think.
16. It wouldn't be bad when at times you wake up with those impulses of love of God to sit up in bed for a while; always being careful though that you get the sleep your head needs (for unawares you could end up incapable of prayer). And be careful and try not to suffer much cold, for the cold is not good for the pains in your side. I don't know why you want those terrors and fears, for God is leading you by love. They were necessary back then. Don't think it is always the devil who impedes prayer, for God in his mercy sometimes takes it away. And I am inclined to say that this is almost as great a favor as when he bestows much prayer; and this for many reasons that I do not have time to tell you now. The prayer God gives you is incomparably greater than thinking about hell, and you wouldn't be able to do so even if you desired. And don't desire to do so, for there is no reason for it.
17. Some of the responses of the sisters made me laugh. Others were excellent, for they gave me light on the subject, for don't think that I know the meaning. I didn't do any more than mention to you haphazardly what I will speak to you about the next time I see you, God willing.
18. I was amused by good Francisco de Salcedo's response. His humility is in a sense strange. God so leads him with fear that it could even seem to him wrong to speak of these matters in this way. We have to accommodate ourselves to what we see in souls. I tell you he is a holy man, but God is not leading him along the road he is leading you. Indeed, he is leading him as he does the strong, and us as he does the weak. The response was long for someone of Francisco's temperament.
19. I just now read your letter again. I hadn't understood that you wanted to get up during the night, as you say, but thought you just wanted to sit up in the bed. I thought that was already a lot, for it is important not to go without sleep. In no way should you get up no matter how much fervor you feel, and even less so if you can sleep. Don't be afraid of sleep. If you could hear what Fray Peter of Alcántara said in this regard, you wouldn't be afraid of going to sleep, even if you had become wide awake.
20. Your letters do not tire me, for they console me greatly, and I would be consoled if I were able to write more frequently. But I have so much correspondence that I cannot write more often, and even tonight my prayer has been impeded by this work. This doesn't cause me any scruple, only regret at not having time. God gives it to us that we might always spend it in his service, amen.
21. Different kinds of fish in this town are so scarce that it is a pity for the sisters, and so I was delighted with those sea bream. I think considering the weather they could have been sent without bread. If you manage to have some when Serna comes, or some fresh sardines, give the subprioress the means for sending them, for her package was very well wrapped. This is a terrible place for having to go without eating meat, for there is never even a fresh egg around. Nonetheless, I was thinking today that I haven't felt so well in years, and I am keeping all the observance that the other nuns do, which is a great consolation for me.
22. The enclosed verses that are not in my handwriting are not my work, but they seem to me good for Francisco. In the way the nuns at St. Joseph's compose theirs, one of the sisters here did these. During these Christmas festivities we did a lot of this in recreation. Today is the second day of the year.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
23. I thought that you would send us your carol, for these have neither rhyme nor reason to them, and the sisters sing everything. I now recall one that I once composed while in deep prayer, and it seemed I entered into even greater quiet. Here it is, but I don't remember if the verses went just like this. See how even from here I want to provide you with some recreation.
 

Oh Beauty exceeding
All other beauties!
Paining, but You wound not,
Free of pain You destroy
The love of creatures.

Oh, knot that binds
Two so different,
Why do You become unbound
For when held fast You strengthen
Making injuries seem good.

You bind the one without being
With Being unending;
Finish, without finishing,
You love, without having to love,
Magnify our nothingness.

24. I don't remember any more. What a brain for a foundress! But I tell you I thought I had a great one when I composed this. God forgive you for making me waste time, but I think these stanzas will touch you and inspire you with devotion, but don't tell anyone. Doña Guiomar and I were together at that time. Give her my regards.
