1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. Oh, how many blessings this old daughter of yours begged for you on reception of this letter that Padre Mariano sent me today, 9 January. On the vigil of the Epiphany I had received the letter that came with the commission for Caravaca, which it was my delight to be able to send on, within two days, with a very reliable messenger. Your letter, despite your effort to soften the news of your illness, distressed me greatly. Blessed be God for granting me the wonderful favor of restoring you to health. Then I wrote to those monasteries I could asking for prayers for you. I will have to write again to give them the good news, having no other way to inform them. What a blessing it was that this other letter arrived so quickly. Every day I feel a greater obligation to you for the care you take to bring me joy; so I hope that God will reward you.
2. I tell you I was most pleased that now, as though you had no other responsibilities, you are dedicating yourself to the confessional. It seems to me to be something supernaturally inspired. Nonetheless, we must not seek miracles from God, and it's necessary that you realize you are not made of iron, and that many in the Society have ruined themselves through overwork. For days I have been weeping over what you tell me about the perdition of those souls who entered religious life in order to serve God. It would benefit them greatly to be given good confessors. If in those monasteries to which the discalced nuns are sent you do not provide help of this kind, I fear for the fruitfulness of the effort. Oppressing them with exterior practices and not providing someone to help them interiorly would be like burdening them with a heavy trial. I had this problem at the Incarnation until the discalced friars came.
3. Since you want to do this work only to help souls, then do so by finding someone who can guide them, and give orders that if there is a monastery of friars nearby, none of them be allowed to go and disturb these souls. I think Millán is in Antequera; perhaps he would be good. At least his letters that you send me are truly refreshing. May the Lord be pleased to direct everything well.
4. Oh, how happy it makes me to see the perfect way in which you write to Esperanza. For when dealing with letters that will be shown around, it is good that they be written in this way, even for your own sake. And how absolutely right you are in what you say about the reform, that souls are not to be conquered like bodies by force of arms. May God keep you, for you make me very happy. For my prayers for you to be efficacious, I would want to be very good -- I mean so that my supplications might be heard. In my desires and purposes I never find that I am cowardly, glory be to God, except when it comes to Paul.
5. Oh, what delight Angela found in the sentiment he manifested on a page written after a letter he sent! She says she would like to kiss his hands repeatedly and wants to tell you to be at ease, for the matchmaker was so qualified and made the knot so tight that it will be taken away only when life ends. And after death the knot will be even tighter, for the foolish striving for perfection will not be so excessive and the remembrance of you will rather help her praise the Lord. Her former freedom in fact kept her at war. Now the submission in which she lives is far better and more pleasing to God, for she finds someone who helps her bring to the Lord souls who will praise him. And this is such a great consolation and joy that I share in it in large measure. May he be blessed forever.
Your paternity's unworthy daughter and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
