For Madre María de San José, prioress.
1. Jesus be with you, my daughter. Before I forget, how is it that you never tell me anything about Padre Fray Bartolomé de Aguilar, the Dominican? I tell you, we owe him a great deal, for all the things he said were bad about that other house we bought were the reason for our having left it. As often as I think of the kind of life you would have had to live there, I can't thank God enough. May he be praised in everything. Be convinced that Fray Bartolomé is very good and that for matters concerning religious life he has more experience than others. I wouldn't want you to forget to call for him at times. He is a very good friend and well informed, and a monastery has nothing to lose by having persons like him to speak with. Here is a letter I've written him; please send it on.
2. Before I forget, I liked the note you sent me about the alms that were received and your estimation of how much you have earned. Please God what you say is true, for I would be delighted. But you're a fox, and I fear you are using some ruse as you do in regard to your health in order to please me.
3. Our prioress in Malagón remains the same. I have repeatedly asked our padre if water from Loja brought this far would help, for we could send for it; remind him of this. Today I have sent him a letter through a priest who was going down there to see him only on business. I was delighted to have that opportunity and so I am not writing to him now. You do me a great favor by sending me his letters, but be assured that even if there are no letters from him, those from you are most welcome -- have no fears about that.
4. I have already sent your package to Doña Juana de Antisco. There hasn't been time yet for me to receive an answer. For persons like her, it doesn't matter even if you have to spend something from the monastery, especially since we are not in need the way we were in the beginning. For when there is need, you are more obligated to your daughters.
5. Oh, how vain you will become now that you are almost provincial. And how it amused me that you said with such indifference, "Here are some carols from the nuns," when you were probably the one behind them. I don't think it would be bad for me to tell you -- since you say that nobody there tells you anything -- to be careful not to yield to vanity. At least it appears evident you don't want to say or do anything foolish. Please God your intention will always be to serve him, for there is nothing wrong in all this. I am laughing to myself to see how burdened I am with correspondence and yet spend time writing about trivia. I will easily pardon you for boasting of knowing how to guide the one with the gold ingots if you in fact succeed, for I have a strong desire to see you without worry. Yet my brother is advancing so much in virtue he would willingly come to your aid in all your needs.
6. It's gracious of you not to want there to be any other like Teresa. But you should know, certainly, that if my Bela does not have the natural and supernatural grace of the other (for we have truly seen some of the things God was bringing about in her), she has more intelligence, talent, and gentleness, so that you can get her to do whatever you wish. It's extraordinary the talent this child has, for with some drab little shepherds and some little nuns and a statue of our Lady belonging to her, there isn't a feast in which she doesn't create something with these in her hermitage or at recreation, along with some verses for which she provides a lovely tune, all of which leave us amazed. I have only one problem: I don't know how to correct the way she holds her mouth, for she keeps it very tight and has a laugh that is extremely cold, and she always goes around laughing. Sometimes I make her open her mouth, at other times close it, and at other times tell her not to laugh. She says it's not her fault but her mouth's, and she's right. Whoever has seen the charm of Teresa, physical and otherwise, must notice the difference more -- and here they do -- although I do not manifest my own view; I'm only telling you this in secret. Don't say anything to anyone, but I would like you to know the trouble I'm going to in order that she correct the way she holds her mouth. I think that when she's older, it won't look so cold, and at least her words are not cold.
7. That is my picture of your girls so that you don't think I am lying when telling you how one is better than the other. I've done so that you may have a laugh. Have no fear that I will dispense you from all the work I give you in receiving and sending letters.
8. Most pleasing to me were the verses that arrived from down there. I sent the first ones to my brother and some of the others, for they were not all of equal merit. I think you could show them to the old saint, telling him that this is how you spend your recreation, always speaking the language of perfection, and it is right to provide some diversion for the one to whom you owe so much. All that charity of his amazes me.
9. You ought to know that some adversity is being prepared for Padre Garciálvarez, for they say that he is educating you in pride; tell him this. Now the nuns in Avila are anxious about what they will write you, for my brother told them you had sent him the letter so that they would respond. You should know that no one here wears, or has worn, worsted cloth except me, for even now with all the freezing cold, I have not been able to do otherwise -- I have a great fear of the pain in my kidneys. So much has been mentioned to me about what I'm doing that I have a scruple about it. And since our padre took away my old habit, which was made of coarse wool, I don't know what to do. May God pardon him. Nonetheless, I say that because of the heat down there you couldn't wear anything but underskirts of light material, but not the same for the habit. The other matters little. Until they bring me what my holy prior is sending me, I don't know what to write him about, because I cannot say that I received it. I must write him a letter that I can send with the muleteer.
10. O Jesus, how obliged I am to him for what he does for you. How we laughed over Gabriela's letter, and how we were filled with devotion on hearing of the diligence of our saints and also the mortification of good Garciálvarez. I pray earnestly for them. Give my regards to him and to all the nuns, for I would like to write to each one, so much do I love them. Certainly, I have an especially great love for each sister; I don't know why. My regards to the Portuguese nun's mother, and to Delgada. How come you never mention Bernarda López? Read the enclosed letter for Paterna, and if it doesn't sound right you can make your emendations as the superior of that house. You have an advantage over me in knowing what would be the appropriate thing to say. God reward you for what you do for them -- I mean this -- for it gives me much consolation. It's a pity I don't know how to end when I write. Please God you will not gain the habit of charming others, as our padre has. May God charm you and transport you into himself, amen, amen.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
11. Open this letter to the prioress of Paterna and read it, for I sealed it by mistake. And read the one for the prior of Las Cuevas to whom I have written again -- although in such a hurry that I don't know what I said -- and seal it.
