1. Jesus be with your reverence. Oh, how happy it made me to learn that you are well! May God be blessed forever, for in these past days I have been troubled about your health. Take care of yourself, for the love of God, for if you are well everything will work out all right. Indeed, when I see you sick or with some suffering, I understand how much I love you in the Lord.
2. Before I forget, don't in any way try to have Nicolao come up here -- that would be very unfortunate for the nuns in Seville -- until that widow has entered down there. The prioress has been writing me about how the devil is trying to block her entrance and how Nicolao is carefully dealing with this matter. Although she has a keen desire to enter, others are making her doubtful. You must realize how important this is to the nuns, since with her dowry they could pay off their debt on the house.
3. I am very delighted with the good archbishop God has given us here. I don't worry about that gossip of the friars; it will end up like their other calumnies: they have found a man who longs to undergo such things.
4. As soon as I received your letter, I sent the archdeacon his. I don't think he will do anything, and I would like us to stop bothering him. Since we now have an archbishop, I have thought we could perhaps get him to speak to the chapter since the matter has already become public.
5. If Tostado is being dealt with the way you say, don't be afraid that the friars will be an obstacle to it any more. I am delighted that you are going to see Señora Doña Luisa, for we owe her a great deal in every way. She wrote to me saying she thought you were going to come to see her. The archdeacon said he would try to get them to answer the letter promptly and that he would come to see me. I will take care of the matter, for during these past days I haven't been able to attend to business affairs.
6. I did not dare express myself so openly in previous letters. Now that you are well, I want you to know that I can't wait to take the matter out of the hands of those blessed friars to whom Padre Juan Díaz entrusted it, for Maestro Córdoba is a cousin of Padre Valdemoro, and the other is a friend of both the prior and the provincial, who believe everything that is told to them, which is not little. I truly believe that they were not, in their minds, deceptive, for they are both well-meaning men. But when it seems that one might be proceeding unjustly, one doesn't have much enthusiasm. From what we can figure out, our padre will now be in Granada. The prioress of Seville informed me that the archbishop has sent word asking him to return to Seville; I don't know any more.
7. Thank Nicolao for what he is doing for the nuns. And for goodness' sake let him be if God calls him to more important matters than those of the archbishop, for God will provide someone else, although I certainly regret any trouble this would cause the archbishop; and that is how it should be, for we owe him a great deal. For some days I have been certain that the Grand Inquisitor would be the archbishop here; this is fortunate for us, and even if in some things it seems he is not so ...
