1. Jesus be with your honor. I already mentioned in the letter sent through the mail carrier from Alba that the sardines arrived in good condition and the sweets at a good time, although I would have preferred that you had kept the best for yourself. May God reward you. Now don't send me anything else, for when I want something I'll ask for it. Congratulations for having moved to our area. Nevertheless look over carefully the room I mentioned, for if repairs are not made it will be dangerous; it was in such a state that the danger was great. Anyway, be careful.
2. With respect to the secret in my regard, I don't mean that you should feel obliged under pain of sin, for I am very much opposed to that sort of thing and one can slip if not careful. It's enough that you know it would cause me distress. As for the promise, my confessor has told me that it was not valid, which made me very happy, for I was worried about it. I also told him about the obedience you promised to me, which seemed to me inopportune. He says that obedience is good, but that you shouldn't promise it to me or to anyone else. And so I don't want you to do so, and even without the promise I accept your wish only reluctantly. I do so for the sake of your consolation on the condition that you don't make a promise of it to anyone. I rejoiced that you feel that Fray John understands you, for he has experience. And even Francisco has a little, but not of what God is granting you. May he be blessed forever without end. With both of them you are now well cared for.
3. How good God is! It seems to me he wants to show his greatness by raising up miserable people, and with so many favors, for I don't know any who are more wretched than the two of us. You ought to know that for more than eight days I have been in such a state that were it to last I would not be able to attend to so many business matters. From the time before I last wrote you, I've begun to have raptures again, and this distresses me because they happen in public sometimes. One came upon me at Matins. Trying to resist them doesn't help, nor can they be disguised. I'm so terribly embarrassed that I want to hide I don't know where. I plead with God not to let this happen to me in public. Beg this of God for me, because there are many disadvantages to experiencing them, and it doesn't seem to me that the prayer is better. I've been going around these days as though I were partially drunk; at least I am well aware that the soul is in a good place. Since the faculties are not free, it is a difficult thing to have to attend to more than what the soul wishes.
4. Prior to this, for about eight days I often found it impossible even to have a good thought, but was left in extreme aridity. In a certain way this highly pleased me, for I had spent some other days before those like the ones I am having now, and it is a great pleasure to see so clearly the little that we can do of ourselves. May he be blessed who can do everything, amen. I have said a great deal. The rest is not meant to be written or even spoken. It's good that we praise the Lord, each for the other; at least you should do so for me, for I am incapable of giving him the thanks I owe him, and so I need much help.
5. As for what you told me you experienced, I don't know what to say, for it is certainly beyond what you can understand and the beginning of many blessings, if you do not lose them through your own fault. I have already passed through this kind of prayer, and the soul afterward usually finds rest, and sometimes undertakes some penances. Especially, if the impulse is very strong, it doesn't seem the soul can endure it without doing something for God. It is a touch of love that is given to the soul in which you will understand, if it goes on increasing, what you say you do not understand in the poem; for it is a great affliction and pain that comes without one's knowing how, and most delightful. And although, as a matter of fact, it is a wound caused by the love of God in the soul, one doesn't know where it comes from or how, or whether it is a wound or what it is, but it feels this delightful pain that makes it complain, and so it says:
 

Sin herir, dolor hacéis
y sin dolor deshacéis
el amor de las criaturas
6. For when the soul is truly touched by this love of God, the love it has for creatures is taken away without any pain, I mean in such a way that the soul is no longer attached to any love. This doesn't come about without this love of God, for whatever regards creatures, if we love them greatly, causes pain; and separation from them causes much more. As God takes hold of a soul, he gives it dominion over all creatures. And even if that presence and delight is taken away (which is what you are complaining of), as if nothing had been experienced in the bodily senses, to which God wanted to give some share in the soul's joy, God doesn't abandon it. Neither does he fail to leave it enriched with favors, as is seen by the effects afterward with the passing of time.
7. As for the lascivious feelings that you tell me about, don't pay any attention to them. For although I have never experienced this -- for God in his goodness has always delivered me from those passions -- I think it must happen because the delight of the soul is so great that it arouses these natural feelings. They will die away with the help of God if you pay no attention to them. Other people have spoken to me about this.
8. The shaking will also go away, for since it is something new the soul grows frightened, and it has reason to be frightened. As the experience repeats itself you will become more capable of receiving favors. Do all that you can to resist this shaking and any exterior thing so that none of this becomes a habit, for it is a hindrance more than a help.
9. As for the heat you say you feel, it has little importance; it could be somewhat harmful to one's health if excessive, but it will also perhaps go away as will the shaking. These things, in my opinion, have to do with one's physical constitution. Since you have a sanguine temperament, the intense movement of the spirit along with one's natural heat, which is gathered in the superior part and touches the heart, can give rise to this. But, as I say, the quality of the prayer isn't any greater on this account.
10. I think I've answered what you said about "feeling afterward as though nothing happened." I think it may be St. Augustine who says that the spirit of God passes without leaving a trace just as an arrow passes through the air without leaving one. Now I recall that I answered this question. A huge amount of mail has arrived since I received your letters, and I still have many letters to write so that I don't have much time for this one.
11. At other times the soul is left in such a condition that it cannot return to itself for many days, but it seems like the sun that cannot be seen although its rays can be felt. So the soul seems to have its seat far off somewhere, and it animates the body, not being in it, since one or other of its faculties is suspended.
12. You are doing very well with your style of meditation, glory to God; I mean when you don't have the prayer of quiet. I don't know if I have answered everything; I always reread your letters, which requires a bit of time, and now I haven't had time to reread your last one except in bits and pieces. You shouldn't make the effort to read over those you send me. I never reread mine. If some word is missing, put it in, and I will do the same here with yours. The meaning is at once clear, and it is a waste of time to reread them unnecessarily.
13. For those days when you are unable to be recollected during the time of prayer, or have a desire to do something for the Lord, I am sending you this hairshirt, for it is a great help in awakening love, provided that you don't wear it when fully dressed or when sleeping. You can wear it anywhere on the body and adjust it so that you feel discomfort.
14. I am fearful of doing this, for you are so sanguine that anything could alter your blood. But doing something for God (even a trifle like this) when one has this love brings about so much happiness that I wouldn't want us to neglect trying it. When winter is over, you will do some other little thing, for I am not forgetting you. Write to let me know how you are faring with this trinket. I tell you that whatever may be the punishment we desire to impose on ourselves, it does become a trinket when we remember what our Lord suffered. I am laughing to myself to think how you send me sweets, presents, and money, and I send you hairshirts.
15. Give my regards to Aranda. Tell him to throw some of these enclosed pastilles around your room or close to the brazier, for they are very healthy and pure, and were given to me by the discalced nuns, who don't use anything out of the ordinary. However mortified you want to be, you can use them. They are excellent for rheumatism and headaches. Would you have this little package delivered to Doña María de Cepeda at the Incarnation.
16. You should know that everything is agreed on for a very good nun to enter the monastery in Seville. She has 6,000 ducats free of any ties, and before entering she has given some gold ingots worth two thousand. She insists so much that they begin to pay for the house with them that the prioress is doing so and has written me that she will pay three thousand now. This made me very happy for they were carrying a great burden. Well, as soon as the nun makes profession, the prioress will pay off everything, and perhaps even before. Pray for this and give God thanks, for in this way the work you began is coming to its conclusion.
17. Our Father Visitator is busy organizing different things; he is well and making his visitation of the houses. It is amazing how calm the province is and how they love him. The prayers are having their good effect, as well as the virtue and talents God gives him.
18. May God be with you and keep you, for I don't know how to stop when I speak to you. All send their best regards, and I do too. Give Francisco de Salcedo my best. You are right to be fond of him, for he is a holy man. My health is very good.
Today is 17 January.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
19. I wrote to the bishop to ask him to send the book, for perhaps I will be stirred to finish it by writing about what the Lord has given me since. Or another large one could be written, if the Lord should desire that I be able to express myself; and if I can't, there would be no great loss.
20. There were some little things belonging to Teresa in the small chest; I'm sending them back. The little round brazier is for Pedro de Ahumada, for since he spends much time in church, his hands must get cold. I don't need any money now. May our Lord reward you for your care and watch over you for me, amen. You can entrust the matter about the money to the prioress of Valladolid, for she will take care of it very well. She knows a merchant who is a great friend of the house, and a friend of mine and a good Christian.
