1. Jesus be with your honor. I have now recovered from the exhaustion of the other day. Since I thought I had too much bile and fearing that my condition would hinder me from observing the Lenten fast, I took a purgative. That day there were so many letters and business matters to attend to that I kept writing letters until two in the morning. This did my head so much harm that I believe the experience has been for my benefit because the doctor has given me orders never to go on writing after midnight, and that sometimes I should get someone else to write my letters.
2. And certainly the work of letter-writing has gone to excess this winter. And I am very much to blame because I sacrificed sleep so as not to have my morning disturbed, and since I did my writing after the vomiting everything worked together in doing me harm. On the day in which I took the purgative I became especially sick, but it seems I am getting better. So you needn't be disturbed, for I am taking good care of myself. I have mentioned this so that you will know why it will be, sometimes, that a letter for you is not in my handwriting or is shorter in length.
3. I am pampering myself as much as I can, and so I was annoyed with what you sent me, for I prefer that you eat them yourself. Sweets are not for me, although I did eat some and will eat the rest. But don't do this again for it displeases me greatly. Isn't it enough that I never send you any delicacies?
4. I don't know what paternostres those are that you say when taking the discipline, for I never told you anything like that. Read my letter again, and you will see what I said; and don't take the discipline any more than is mentioned there. In no way should it be taken more than twice a week. In Lent you may wear the hairshirt once a week provided that you remove it if you see it is doing you harm. Since you are so sanguine, I fear very much your doing this. And since taking the discipline can be bad for the eyesight, I don't agree to your taking it any more often. Also it is a greater penance to practice moderation after having begun, which amounts to breaking the will. You must let me know if the hairshirt makes you feel ill when you wear it.
5. That calm prayer you mention is the prayer of quiet which is described in that little book. As for those sensual stirrings, so that you be tried in every way, as I told you, I see clearly that this is not a matter of importance and that the best thing you can do is to pay no attention to them. Once a very learned man told me that a man came to him extremely distressed because every time he received communion a terribly lascivious mood came over him (much worse than your experience) and that he had been ordered not to receive communion more than once a year, which was enough to fulfill his obligation. And this learned man, although he was not a spiritual person, understood the weakness and told him that he should pay no attention to it and receive communion every eight days. And the trouble went away when the man lost the fear of it. So, you shouldn't pay any attention to this.
6. You can speak with Julián de Avila about anything, for he is very good. He tells me he gets along well with you, and that makes me happy. Go to see him from time to time, and when you want to do some favor for him, give him an alms, for he is very poor and detached from riches, in my opinion. He is one of the better priests there, and it is good to have conversations like this, for everything doesn't have to be prayer.
7. As for sleep, I tell you and command you that it not be less than six hours. Consider how necessary it is for us who are older to take care of these bodies so that they do not tear down the spirit, which is a terrible trial. You wouldn't believe the displeasure I feel these days, for I don't dare pray or read, although, as I say, I am now feeling better. But I have learned my lesson, I'm telling you. So, do what you are told; this is how you will fulfill your duties to God. How foolish it is to think that this is like the prayer that did not allow me to sleep! There is no likeness between them, for I tried much harder to sleep than to stay awake.
8. Certainly I fervently praise the Lord for the favors he grants you and for the effects that follow. You can see how great they are by the virtues you are given, which you would not have been able to acquire even after much effort. You should know that the weakness of the head doesn't depend on eating or drinking; do what I tell you. The Lord is doing me a great favor by giving you such good health. May it please His Majesty to give you many years to spend in his service.
9. This fear that you mention, I think certainly must come from the fact that your spirit senses the evil spirit, and although you do not see it with your bodily eyes, the soul must see or feel it. Keep holy water nearby, for there is nothing that has so much power to make him take flight. It has often helped me. Some did not stop at causing fear, but tormented me greatly; this is for you alone. But if the holy water does not get sprinkled on him, he will not flee, and so it is necessary to sprinkle it all around.
10. Don't think your sleeping so well is a small favor from God, for it is a very great one. And I repeat, don't try to go without sleep; this is not the time for that.
11. It seems to me to be the sign of great charity to desire to take trials for yourself and to give delight to others, and it is a great favor from God that you can even think about doing this. But, on the other hand, it is great foolishness and a lack of humility to imagine that you could possess the virtues Francisco de Salcedo has, or those that God has given you, without prayer. Believe me and let the Lord of the vineyard work, for he knows what each one needs. I have never asked him for interior trials, although he has given me many and truly heavy ones in this life. One's natural constitution and humors have a large part to play in these afflictions. I am glad you are getting to understand the temperament of that saint, for I would like you to be tolerant of his disposition.
12. You should know that I foresaw the effect the judgment would have on him and that he would feel hurt, but it wasn't possible to answer in a serious vein. And if you saw my answer, I didn't fail to praise some of the things he said. Regarding my answer to your response, I couldn't have said anything else without lying. I tell you definitely that my head was in such a condition that I don't even know how I said what I did. That day the business matters and letters had so piled up that it seemed, as it does sometimes, that the devil had done this. And my night was a bad one, for the purgative did me harm. And it was a miracle that I didn't send a letter I had written to Padre Gracián's mother to the Bishop of Cartagena, for I had put it in the envelope addressed to him; I can't thank God enough. I was writing to the bishop about what was happening between the nuns of Caravaca and the vicar general, whom I have never seen. It seems to be a crazy thing; he's forbidden Mass to be said for them. Now this has been taken care of, and the rest I think will turn out all right, which is that he accept the monastery. He can't do otherwise. Enclosed with mine were some other letters of recommendation. See what could have happened, along with my departure from here!
13. We still have fear of this Tostado, who is returning to Madrid. Pray for this. Read the enclosed letter from the prioress in Seville. I was delighted with the one she sent me from you, and the one you wrote to the sisters, which certainly is charming. They all kiss your hands many times, for they were delighted with your letter, and especially my companion. She is the one who is fifty years old and came with us from Malagón. She is extremely good and most wise. At least she is extremely good in watching out for my well-being and shows great concern for me.
14. The prioress of Valladolid wrote me about how everything that could be done in the matter was being done, for Pedro de Ahumada was there. I believe that the merchant who is in charge of the affair will do well. My regards to him and to my little boys, especially Francisco, for I long to see them. You did well in letting the servant girl go, even though there was no occasion to do so, for they don't do anything but get in each other's way when there are so many. Greetings to Doña Juana, Pedro Alvarez, and to all. You should know that my head is much better now than when I began this letter. I don't know if this is not caused by the delight I find in speaking with you.
15. Today Doctor Velázquez was here, who is my confessor. I spoke to him about what you tell me regarding the silver and the tapestries you want to give up, for I didn't want you to fail to advance in the service of God because of my not helping you. There are cases in which I do not trust my opinion, although in this matter his opinion was the same as mine. He says that these things don't have significance as long as you strive to see how little they matter and are detached from them, and that it is reasonable to have a home appropriately furnished since you have sons whom you will have to marry off. So for now be patient, for God usually always provides the occasion for carrying out good desires, and he will do so for you. May God keep you and make you very holy, amen.
It is 10 February.
Your honor's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
