1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, mi padre. I'm not surprised that you are sick, but rather that you are alive after what you must have undergone there both interiorly and exteriorly. I felt infinitely distressed when they told me you were in bed because I know you. Since the illness is not dangerous, although painful, I was very much consoled. I was wondering if you hadn't caught some cold since you travel about so much. Let me know in a detailed way how you are, for love of God -- for even if it is in the handwriting of Padre Miseria, I will be happy -- and whether you need anything. And let nothing cause you distress, for whenever things seem to be going well I am usually less happy than I am now. You already know that the Lord wants us to see that it is His Majesty who does what is good for us. That we come to understand this better and know that the work is his, he usually permits a thousand setbacks. It is then that everything turns out best.
2. I am told nothing about Padre Padilla, which troubles me, nor does he write to me. I would like him to be healthy so that he could care for you. Since Padre Baltasar has to leave, may it please the Lord that you recover your health quickly. I am writing to those Fathers about what was done and what I think about it. This messenger has no other task to carry out.
3. You know, mi padre, I have considered how much we will miss the good nuncio, for, after all, he is a servant of God. His departure would trouble me deeply, and I think that what remains to be done is due to the fact that his hands are tied more than we think. I have a great fear that while negotiations are going on in Rome they will have trouble, for there is someone there continually trying to keep things tied up. I recall that the good Nicolao said, when he passed through here, that the discalced friars would have to get a Cardinal Protector. Today I spoke with a relative, who seems honest, who told me that he knows a prudent person in the curia in Rome who if we paid him would do all that we want. I at once told him that I wanted to have someone there who could discuss matters with Our Father General. See if it would be good for the ambassador to petition him in favor of the discalced friars.
4. You should know that Padre Fray Pedro Fernández was here. He says that if Tostado does not have power over the visitators, the acts remain in force. But he says that if he does, we have only to be silent and obey, for he thinks that the commissaries cannot set up provinces and appoint definitors if they do not receive more authority than they have had. So it is good that we look for help elsewhere. May God help us, for he will do everything, and in his mercy restore you to health quickly, as we are all begging him.
This messenger is not going to Madrid for any other purpose than to see what they want done and to get news about you.
5. Please tell Padre Juan Díaz to deliver these letters to Padre Olea, for they are very important to me, or send for him and give them to him very secretly if you cannot get them to him in another way.
Today is 16 February.
Your Reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
