1. Jesus be with your honor. Before I forget, as I have at other times, tell Francisco to send me some well-cut pens. There aren't any good ones around here, they are a nuisance and make my task harder. Never prevent him from writing to me, for perhaps he may have a need to. He is satisfied with a few words for an answer and they don't cost me anything.
2. I think this illness will end up serving a good purpose, for I am beginning to get accustomed to having another do my writing for me. I could have already done so in matters of little importance; I will continue doing this now. I am much better, for I have taken some pills. I think it did me harm to start fasting during Lent, for it wasn't only my head but my heart as well that was affected. The heart is much better, and even the head has improved the last couple of days, for that is what caused the most pain -- which wasn't little. I was afraid I might become incapacitated for everything. It would have been a serious imprudence to try to practice prayer. And our Lord sees clearly the harm this would have done me. I don't experience any more supernatural recollection. It is as though I had never received any, which truly surprises me, for it wasn't possible for me to resist. Don't be troubled, for little by little my head will become stronger. I take all the care of myself that I see is necessary, and even a little more than is the custom here. Otherwise I wouldn't be able to practice prayer.
3. I have a strong desire to get well. My illness is at a cost to you. For this reason I think my desire is good. I am in such a condition that I need to get better so as not to be a burden. Since mutton does not agree with me, I always have to eat fowl. The root of the whole problem is weakness from my having fasted since the feast of the Exaltation of the Cross in September along with all my work and at my age. Well, to see myself capable of so little is bothersome, for this body of mine has always done me harm and prevented me from good. I'm not so bad off that I cannot write to you myself. I will not inflict this mortification on you for now, which would be a great one judging from myself.
4. As regards the mortification of not being able to use the hairshirt, you will have to pardon me for imposing it on you, for you must not be doing what you choose to do. You should know that the discipline ought to be taken for only a short duration. In that way, you feel it more and it is less likely to do harm. Don't hit yourself too hard; this won't matter even though you may think it is a great imperfection. That you might do something of what you would wish, I am sending you this hairshirt you can wear on two days during the week, by which I mean from the time you get up until you go to bed; don't wear it while sleeping. I was amused by the precision with which you count the days. This is a new practice, and I don't believe the discalced Carmelite nuns have attained to such resourcefulness. See that you never wear the other one; store it away for now.
5. I am sending one to Teresa and also a discipline that she requested of me, a very hard one. Have it sent to her with my best regards. Julián de Avila in writing me has many good things to say about her, which moves me to praise the Lord. May he guide her always, for he has granted a great favor to her, and to us who love her dearly.
6. In a certain way I had desired that you experience some aridity during these days, and so I was delighted when I saw your letter, although what you mentioned cannot be called aridity. Think that what you experience is beneficial for many reasons. If this hairshirt fits all around the waist, place a little linen cloth between it and the stomach. And be careful so that if you feel any discomfort around the kidneys you do not wear it or take the discipline, for you will suffer harm. God desires your health more than your penance, and that you obey. Remember about Saul, and don't do otherwise. You will be doing no small thing if you learn how to put up with that person's disposition, for I hold that the source of all those troubles and sorrows is melancholy, which has a tight control on him. So, there is no fault or anything for us to be surprised about; we should praise the Lord that he does not give us this torment.
7. Take great care not to give up sleep and to eat enough at your collation, for with your desire to do something for God you will not notice anything until the harm is done. And I tell you that I had to learn my lesson for the sake of myself and others. In a certain sense the daily use of the hairshirt is less of a burden because through habit the novelty of which you speak wears off. You shouldn't tighten it around the shoulders the way you usually do. Be careful that none of these things do you any harm. God is granting you a great favor by your being able to bear so well the lack of prayer, for this is a sign that you are resigned to his will. This I believe is the greatest good that prayer brings about.
8. There is good news about my papers. The Grand Inquisitor himself read them, which is something new -- he must have heard some praise of them -- and told Doña Luisa that they contained nothing the Inquisition would have to deal with, and that there were good things in them rather than bad. And he asked her why I hadn't founded a monastery in Madrid. He is very favorable toward the discalced friars. He is the one who has now been made Archbishop of Toledo. I believe Doña Luisa went to see him there where he is, and recommended this matter strongly, for they are great friends, and she wrote to me about it. She will be coming soon and I will find out the rest. You may tell this to the bishop, the subprioress, and Isabel de San Pablo (in secret, so that they don't tell anyone but pray for this matter), and to no other person. This is very good news. My stay here has been beneficial for everything, except for my head because I have had more letters to write than elsewhere.
9. In the letter from the prioress you will see how they have paid half of the amount on the house, without touching the dowry of Beatriz and her mother. They will soon pay everything with the Lord's help. I was delighted with it, as also with that letter from Agustín and to know that he is not going down there. I was sorry that you had already sent a letter without mine. I will have one from the Marchioness of Villena for the viceroy -- she is his beloved niece -- when they can be sent safely. It grieves me to see him still involved in these things. Pray for him, which is what I am doing.
10. Regarding what you say about holy water, I don't know the reason but only what I experience. I have mentioned this to some learned men and they did not object to it. It's enough that the Church uses it, as you say.
Despite all the difficulties that the nun reformers are having, many sins are being prevented by them.
11. There is a lot of truth in what Francisco de Salcedo says regarding Señora Ospedal -- at least that in this instance I am like her. Give my best regards to him, and to Pedro de Ahumada also. I do not want to write any more except that you look to see if you could give Juan de Ovalle what he needs to buy some sheep. This would be most helpful to him and a great act of charity, if you can do it without a loss to yourself.
12. I have changed pens so often in this letter that my handwriting will seem worse than usual; it is due to this and not to my being sick. I wrote this yesterday, and today when I got up I felt better, glory to God. The fear of remaining incapacitated is worse than the illness.
13. My companion has been charming in her words about the stone paver. She told me such wonderful things about him that I told her to write to you. Nonetheless, I think that since the prioress says he is reputable, she ought to know. I don't think he would do a bad job, seeing that she knows both workers; although I always thought that Vitoria would be best suited. Please God the work will be done well, and may he keep you, as I beg him, for his service, amen. Today is 28 February.
14. Father Visitator is well. Now Tostado is returning, according to what they say. From the way all these affairs of ours are going one learns what the world is, for it seems to be nothing but a farce. Nonetheless, I long to see him freed of all those affairs. May the Lord do as he sees is necessary. The prioress and all the nuns send their regards. The prioress of Seville pampers me as does also the prioress of Salamanca. And even those of Beas and Caravaca have not failed to do what they can; in short, they show their concern.
15. I would like to be near you so that you could see all of this, and also, that I could have the pleasure of sending some of it to you. Even just now some very tasty shad arrived from Seville wrapped in bread. I was delighted for there is a great scarcity of fish in this town. Seeing the affection with which they do it is what pleases me.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
