For Mother Prioress of San José in Seville.
1. Jesus be with you, my daughter. Because of the illness described on the enclosed piece of paper, I have not been writing to you, waiting until I felt better so as not to cause you any grief. Although I am much better, I can still do only a little writing; otherwise I immediately feel the harm it does me. But in comparison with how I was a short time ago, the improvement is great, glory to God. May he repay you for the good news you sent me, for I tell you it truly was good news for me, at least regarding the house. What a relief it is to see you free of debt. I have prayed hard for this here, and so will gladly tell about the good news.
2. May God be pleased to hear my prayer, for now with your riches, the office entrusted to you, and the fact that everything is going so well, you will need much help in order to be humble. It seems to me that God is doing this through the favors he is granting you. May he be forever blessed, for you can be very sure that it is he who is bestowing them on you.
3. Would that I could feel the same about San Jerónimo. This woman really makes me suffer. Believe me, she should not have separated herself from me or gone where she could be in fear. Please God the devil will not cause us any trouble, or we will have our hands full. You should advise the prioress -- until my letter arrives -- not to allow her to write a word and to tell her that I think she has become the prey of a very bad humor, and that if this is not so, the matter becomes worse. Since the muleteer is leaving next Monday, at which time I will send a long letter, I am not saying anything more here.
4. God help me, how rich you are! These nuns are amazed at what you sent me. The food arrived ready to eat, and all the rest was beautiful, especially the reliquaries. The large one will be better for Señora Doña Luisa. We have fixed it very nicely, for it arrived with the glass broken, and we have put in new glass and made a solid base for it. I will say more about this when I write at length later. Remain with God.
5. I was most displeased that our padre refuted the things said against us, especially the very indecent things, for they are foolish. The best thing to do is to laugh at them, and let the matter pass. As for me, in a certain way, these things please me.
I am most happy about your health. May God keep you for me, and all the nuns, amen. Pray for me.
6. Because this letter will perhaps go first, I didn't want to neglect writing by this means. I will write to Mother Subprioress, because her complaints amused me. The prioress in Malagón is doing very badly. Today is the last day of February.
Your reverence's unworthy servant ,
Teresa of Jesus
7. For some days I have been holding on to the reply from our padre's mother. It will go out on Monday. She also wrote to me at length about the joy you brought her.
