1. Jesus be with your reverence, mi padre. Today Señor Don Teutonio, who is in Madrid, wrote me that the nuncio is not going to leave. If this is true -- unless you stay in Alcalá under the pretext of being ill -- you must in no way give the impression that you are disobedient.
2. You should know, padre, from what I understand, that these Fathers would now like to be our friends; and until we see what God ordains, it is good to be compliant, as you have been. Certainly I do not cast blame on the nuncio, but the devil's battery is of the kind that nothing would surprise me. You shouldn't fear that no one will dare defend you, for the Lord is your keeper. Since up to the present he has granted us the favor of helping you hold your temper in check, may you continue doing so. Let this be your cross for now, certainly no small one. If the Lord had not helped you in a special way, I don't believe you would have been able to put up with so much.
3. As for the Council's response, there is nothing to hope for. Don't you see that these are all polite words? What need is there to have this directive sent from here so that it can be annulled, since they have a copy of it there and know that it is authentic? Now is not the time. Let us wait a little, for the Lord knows what it is he is doing better than we know what it is we want.
4. What do you think of how they make us appear in this piece of writing? I don't know why one tries to refute these things. Our padre is making a mistake, for this is something utterly base. For the love of God, don't show it to anyone, for they would think it imprudent to pay any attention to such foolishness or talk about it. I think it would be very imperfect to do anything about it, except laugh.
5. You should know, mi padre, that my heavy correspondence and many other duties that I tried to handle all alone have caused a noise and weakness in my head. And I have been given orders that unless it's very necessary I should not be writing letters in my own hand, and so I will not be long. I only say that as regards what you said you want to procure from the king, don't think about doing it until you have considered it most carefully, for in my opinion we would lose much of our credibility. God will do what is necessary by another means. May he watch over you for me.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
