For Mother Prioress of San José in Seville.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. After so much good news and the many gifts you have sent me, I have every reason to write a long letter; at least doing this would make me very happy. But I wrote you yesterday and the labor this winter of letter-writing has so weakened my head that I have been truly sick. I am much better, but nevertheless, I almost never write in my own hand, for they say I must not do so if I want to recover completely.
2. Oh, how delighted I was with the beautiful things you sent me through the administrator. You wouldn't believe how much work he takes on for the monastery in Malagón and how ready he is to help me. And don't think it takes little effort to keep the construction work going well, for there are a thousand things that have to be attended to with the workmen. I gave him the small reliquary. Both are very lovely, but the large one is still better; especially the way it was embellished here, for it arrived with the glass broken as I wrote you. New glass was put in that looks very nice. The base was twisted, so we had an iron one cast. This should have been done in the first place. I also gave him the jar, I mean the little cup, which was the most charming I've ever seen. Don't think that because I have to wear a habit of finer material, things have got so bad that I need to drink from something as nice as that! I also gave him the bottle just as it was. He greatly appreciated this. He is a man of integrity. Well, from down there you have helped your house in Malagón. They wouldn't let me give away the orange-flower water, because it gives life to the prioress and is beneficial for me too, and we didn't have any. Ask for some, on my part, from the mother of the Portuguese nun and have it sent to us. Do this out of charity -- that is the condition.
3. Oh, how happy I am that you have paid off the debt on the house. But until that nun is professed we ought not rejoice too much. It is true, though, that if that should not happen, God will provide in another way. Pray hard that he might be pleased to take away this trouble I have with my head. Today, by the mail carrier, I sent you an account of what in part brought it on.
4. Your manner of prayer makes me happy. Recognizing that you have it and that God is doing you a favor is not a lack of humility since you understand that it is not your doing but his. That is how we know that the prayer is from God. I greatly praise him that you are faring so well, and I will try to give him joyful thanks as you ask me. Ask God that I might be the kind of person whose prayers he will answer.
5. In regard to Beatriz, her prayer is good, but insofar as possible avoid paying attention to these things in conversations or any other way. You know this depends very much on the prioress. San Jerónimo did not speak of that here, because the prioress immediately interrupted and scolded her, and so she kept quiet. And you saw that when I was there she never carried on in this way. I don't know whether we were wrong in letting her leave our midst. Please God things will turn out well.
6. Think what would have happened if the others rather than the prioress had found the page! May God pardon the one who has told her to write. Our padre would like me to write to her in a severe manner with respect to this. Read the enclosed letter that I am writing her, and if it seems all right to you, send it to her. You are doing extremely well in not allowing anyone to talk about it to others. The prioress in Beas writes me that the nuns speak only of their sins with their confessor and that they are all finished within a half hour. She tells me that it should be like this everywhere, that they are all very much at peace, and that they have a great love for their prioress in whom they confide. Since I have some experience in this matter, you could ask them why they don't write to me but go and ask someone who perhaps doesn't have as much I do. And in a matter like this it would be fitting more than in any other. And tell San Francisco to make her eat meat after Lent is over and not let her fast.
7. I would like to know what she means when, without explaining, she speaks of the great force that God uses over her. What a trial it is that she now goes around weeping all the time in front of others and is seen as ready to write at any moment. Get what she wrote and send it to me. And remove any hope she has of speaking about this with anyone other than our padre, because those conversations have ruined her. Be aware that this language is understood there less than you think. However if it is used in confession and with Padre Acosta no harm can come. But I know well that it is less fitting for her than for anyone. It is a good thing the order was given that in Paterna more leeway could be allowed to the nuns, although it would have been better if from the start they had required only what was obligatory. In these matters of reform, if the nuns obtain something by shouting, it seems to them at once that they will obtain everything else in the same way. You did very well in advising them to live in community.
8. I have not given the letters or reliquary to Doña Luisa because she was away and returned the day before yesterday. I am waiting for all the visits to die down. Pray for her and for Doña Guiomar, for they have many trials.
9. Since I am not writing this letter all at once, I don't know whether I may have forgotten to answer any of the things you asked about. Since these bolts I am sending are similar to the ones that are here on the grille in the choir, I don't think it's necessary that they be more attractive, although I suppose you won't be satisfied with them. But do as they do here, for the nuns here don't consider themselves less refined than you, and a little bolt is better than something else, for I don't know what kind of locks you want. The crucifixes are being made. I believe they will cost a ducat.
10. All the nuns ask for your prayers, and Isabel was delighted with the sweets and the coarse woolen cloth. May God reward you. As for myself, I have plenty of clothes. Do you think it doesn't sadden me to have nothing to send you? It certainly does. But the barrenness of this region is incredible except for the quinces when they are in season, and even then, the quinces down there are much better. The nuns were delighted with the spices and the catamaca. They didn't allow me to send any to anyone -- I very much would have liked to -- for many have great need for it.
11. Enclosed are the responses to the question I posed to my brother. The respondents had decided to submit their answers to the judgment of the nuns at St. Joseph's in Avila. The bishop was present and told them to send the answers to me so that I might judge them, just when my head was in too miserable a state even to read them. Show them to Father Prior and to Nicolao, but you must explain to them what was being done, and don't let them read the judgments before reading the answers they submitted. And if you can, send them back so that our padre can enjoy them -- for that is why they sent them to me from Avila -- even though this may not be along the muleteer's way.
12. I am sending you this letter that my brother wrote me (he writes many about the favors that God grants him and this one was near at hand). I think it will make you happy since you are fond of him. Tear it up right away, and remain with God, for I'll never end this and writing is bad for me. May His Majesty make you a saint.
13. Now they have just given me a letter written by our padre from Málaga fifteen days ago, I mean from tomorrow. He is well, glory to God. Today is 2 March.
My regards to all, and let me know about Fray Bartolomé's health.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
14. Be grateful that I wrote this out myself, for I haven't been writing my own letters even to St. Joseph's in Avila. Yesterday I wrote to you and to our padre through the mail carrier. Thus, I'm not doing so now.
