1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your honor and repay you for the consolation your letter brought me. It came just when I was most concerned about finding someone through whom I could send a letter and give you news of myself, for it is only right that I not neglect you. I will be delaying a little more than I said in my letter, but I assure you I will not be wasting a moment. Fifteen days have not gone by since we moved from our other house. The move was made in a very solemn procession and with much devotion. May the Lord be blessed for everything.
2. Since Wednesday I have been staying with Señora Doña María de Mendoza; because she has been ill, she hasn't been able to see me, and I needed to talk to her about some matters. I thought of staying for only a day, but the weather got so cold, with snow and ice, that it seemed traveling would have been unbearable; so I have been here until today, Saturday. I will definitely leave for Medina on Monday, with the Lord's help. And despite my hurry I will be staying there and at St. Joseph's in Avila more than fifteen days because of some business matters I must attend to. So I think I will be detained longer than I had said. You will forgive me, for from what I have mentioned here, you will see that I cannot help the delay. It will not be a long one. I beg you not to proceed with buying a house until I arrive; I want it to be suitable for our purposes since both you and he who is in glory are giving us the alms.
3. With regard to the licenses, the one from the king will be gotten easily, with heaven's help, even though some trouble might arise. My experience is that the devil bears up badly with these houses, and so is always persecuting us. But the Lord can do all things, and the devil is routed.
4. Here we have met with very great opposition, and from the most renowned persons in this locality; at present everything has been ironed out. You shouldn't think you must give our Lord only what you now have in mind, but much more. His Majesty shows his gratitude for good works by asking for more, and it's nothing to give money, for doing so causes us little pain. When they throw stones at you and your son-in-law and all of us who take part in this effort, as was almost done in Avila when St. Joseph's was founded, then the work will prosper. And I will be sure that the monastery will suffer no loss, nor will those of us who undergo trials, but that much good will come about. May the Lord guide everything as he sees is fitting. You should not be sad. It made me sad not to have mi padre here. If necessary, we will try to have him come. Indeed, the devil is already beginning. May God be blessed, for if we do not fail him, he will not fail us.
5. I truly long to see you, for I think this will bring me much consolation, and then I will respond to the kindnesses you show me in your letter. Please God I will find you and your son-in-law in good health. I earnestly beg both of you for prayers. You see, with my wretched health, I need them for these journeys, although the fevers have not returned. I will take care -- and I am doing so -- of what you asked of me, and these sisters likewise. All of them beg for your prayers. May the Lord always lead you by the hand, amen.
Today is 19 February. Written in Valladolid.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
6. Would you, in charity, have the enclosed letter given to Doña Luisa as well as my best wishes. I don't have time to write to Señor Diego de Avila, and even the letter to Señora Doña Luisa is not written in my hand. Would you tell her about my health, please, and that I hope to see her soon. Don't be disturbed about the licenses, for I hope in the Lord that everything will turn out very well.
