For Mother Prioress, María de San José.
1. Jesus be with your reverence and reward you for so many nice gifts. Everything arrived safely and in good condition. I'll be writing more about this through the muleteer. Here I'll mention what is important.
2. I have felt envious of that angel. May God be praised that she was worthy to enjoy him so quickly, for I certainly do not doubt this. As for the rest, be assured that it was plain madness. Don't pay any attention to them or say anything about them, nor of what Beatriz said. I have greatly prized her charity. Give her my regards and thank her for me as well as her mother, and give my regards to all.
3. I am worried about that fever of yours and the subprioress's illness. Blessed be God who so wants to put us to the test this year and give you so many trials at the same time. And the worst is the poor health, for when one is in good health everything is bearable. Let me know as soon as possible how you are doing with your fever and also how the subprioress is. Please God the illness will not be as long-lasting as usual, for you are so few in number that I don't know how you will be able to get along. May God provide as he can, for I am worried.
4. In what you say about the burial, be assured that you did very well. Here we bury the nuns within the cloister, and so I must get our padre to make this a rule. The other practice is for nuns who are not bound to enclosure. Thus Padre Garciálvarez -- give him my regards -- was perfectly right, as he was also in holding that a priest may enter the enclosure for a reason like this. But no, it would be better in this regard that the priest be always Padre Garciálvarez. The monastery of the friars is so far away that I don't see how this could be done. I think Padre Garciálvarez is preferable since he is the nuns' ordinary confessor. I will take this matter up now with our padre and send you a license, for I will see him, God willing, before Pentecost. The nuncio has already sent for him, and it seems the negotiations are going well. Imagine how happy I am. He has gone to Caravaca and Beas.
5. I am sending you this letter from Alberta so that you will know how they are doing. We are still not finished with that monastery. Pray for them and for the nuns in Beas who are a cause of distress for me because of their lawsuits.
6. Yesterday I received your letter and found someone at once with whom to send it to our padre. While he is here I will repay you for the care you have taken in delivering mine to him. Accept the lay sister; please God she will be sufficient for you. I already told our padre that I would write you to accept her.
7. Regarding the renunciation of property of good Bernarda, keep in mind that since her parents are alive, the monastery does not receive the inheritance because it is the parents who are the heirs. If they had died before she did, the monastery would receive the inheritance. This is certain for I have consulted learned experts. Parents and grandparents are heirs by right. In their absence, the inheritance goes to the monastery. Their obligation is to give her a dowry, and if by chance they do not know this, they will praise God for the agreement you wish to come to with them. If they at least give the equivalent of what they promised in the guaranty to pay, it would be an excellent thing. See what you can do down there in this regard, for it would not be fitting for them to fail to give some dowry.
8. Padre Nicolao will know what the best thing to do is. Many regards to him, and to Padre Fray Gregorio as well, and anyone else you see, and remain with God. Although for some days my head has been much better, there is never a day in which I do not experience much noise in my head and it's very painful for me to write.
9. Mother Prioress from Malagón will be good company for me, but it grieves me to see her so ill without any hope of recovery, although there is great improvement. She eats better and is able to get up. But since the fever does not go away, we cannot pay too much attention to that, according to the doctor. God can do all things, and he could grant us this favor. Pray much that he do so. Since she is writing to you, I will say no more about her.
Today is 6 May.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
10. Give my special regards to Gabriela. I thoroughly enjoyed her letter and am happy that she is in good health. May God give this to all of you, as he can, amen, amen.
