For Mother Prioress of Seville.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with you, my daughter. I would much rather know that you are in good health than have all the gifts you are sending, although they are worthy of a queen. May our Lord reward you. The orange-flower water is nice, and there's an ample amount of it. It came just at the right time. I'm infinitely grateful. And the corporals are exquisitely done. It seems God inspired you because the prioress of Segovia has sent me a pall.When I was there, if I recall, I asked her to make one for me. It is all chain stitched with tiny pearls and garnets. They say the handwork alone is worth thirty ducats. And now we have the corporals made by Beatriz with the little cross -- more of them could have been added to fill up the box. The corporals are so lovely that I prefer them to everything else. The water arrived in good condition and now we have enough. It must have been you, as usual, who did the packing, for the things were well arranged.
2. I would want nothing more than to repay you in some way for what you sent me, for after all the gifts were a gesture of love. I have never in my life seen a place as dry as this when it comes to anything that tastes good. After my return from Seville, it seems to be even more sterile.
3. I have given orders here that the bill I owe for one hundred ducats to Asensio Galiano be paid now in Seville. I don't know if you remember that fifty ducats went to Mariano for the expenses of preparing that house for our arrival, and the other fifty were spent for the rent. For since Asensio has died, I have taken care to pay it, and I will not rest until I see you free of all these worries. The trials the Lord is giving you are enough. I am truly distressed over your illness and that of the subprioress, coming now at the beginning of summer. May God provide a remedy because I don't know what you are going to do.
4. I have already written by the mail carrier that you should take the lay sister and that the body of that little saint remain where it is, in the choir, for we must be buried within the enclosure and not in the church. I also wrote that since this saint's mother and father are living they become the heirs, even if she renounced these goods in favor of the monastery. If they had died before her, the monastery would have been the beneficiary. But they are obliged to give a suitable dowry. So, work things out as best you can. If he gave over the amount established in the guaranty, that would be great. But don't be having scruples about perfection, for however much we do they will say we are covetous. Well, you will have to follow whatever orders our padre gives. Write to him, and take good care of yourself, for me and for love of God.
5. I feel very sorry for Madre Brianda, although it seems she is better since she came. I greatly enjoy her company. Since she will be writing, according to what she has told me, I will say no more about her.
6. You will already have learned that the nuncio has sent for our padre. The negotiations seem to be going well. Pray for him. May His Majesty watch over you for me and make you very holy. I have been envious of the good Bernarda. We have prayed very much for her in these houses, although I don't believe she has need of it. Today is the vigil of the Ascension.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
7. My regards to Mother Subprioress and to Gabriela. Send me the recipe for the syrup that Sister Teresa was taking, for her father is asking for it. Don't in any way forget; it's what she took habitually during the day.
