For Mother Prioress in Seville.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be in your reverence's soul, my daughter. I am deeply sorry that you have so many trials and that the fevers are continuing. But whoever wants to be a saint must suffer more.
2. Our padre sent me your letter written to him on the 10th of this month. My head is in a miserable state, and all of these days I've been worried about both your health and Mother Subprioress's, for I am very sorry about your illness. Madre Brianda is better at times and then her sickness returns.
3. As for my head, there has been some improvement in that some of the weakness is gone. I can write and use it more than usual. But the noise continues and is most unpleasant, and so I use a secretary, except for secret matters or when I am obliged for reasons of courtesy to write the letter myself. So, be patient in this regard as in all else.
4. I had written up to this point when my brother arrived. He sends you his best regards. I don't know if he will write to you. I mean Lorenzo. He is well, glory to God. He is going to Madrid on business. Oh, how sorry he has felt about your trials. I assure you that God truly wants you to be very holy. Take courage, for this period will be followed by another and you will be glad to have suffered.
5. As to whether the little slave girl should enter, by no means oppose it, for at the beginning in making these foundations many things are done that lie outside the general norm. You don't have to talk with her about perfection. It is enough that she serve well. The rest doesn't matter much for a lay sister. She could go her whole life without making profession if she is not meant for it. Her sister's situation is worse, but don't fail to receive her either and beg God to make her good. Don't be demanding with either of them as regards perfection. It's enough for them to carry out well the essentials. They owe you much and you rescued them out of great difficulty. Something has to be suffered. It is always this way in the beginning; it cannot be otherwise.
6. That other nun, if she is so good, take her. There's need for many nuns to replace those that die. The nuns go to heaven; don't grieve. I already see how you miss the good subprioress. We will try to get those in Paterna to return, once matters are settled.
7. Oh, what a letter I wrote you and Padre Fray Gregorio! Please God it will reach you. How I took you to task regarding your plan to move! I don't understand how you could even begin to speak about such a foolish thing.
8. Regards to him and to all my friends and my daughters. My brother has just arrived and I don't want to keep him waiting. May God watch over you carefully, for your illness grieves me more than anything. For goodness' sake take care of yourself and also my Gabriela. You should all wear linen and forget about austerity at a time when you are in such need. Here there is much sickness. My regards to all the nuns. May God preserve you for me, for I don't know how I can love you so much. Brianda sends her regards to you. Despite her illness, she is very good company for me. Today is 28 June.
9. Try to borrow money for food, for you can pay it back later. Don't go hungry, for that grieves me very much. We also try to do that here, and afterward God provides.
Your reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus
