For Madre Ana de San Alberto.
1. Jesus be with your reverence, my daughter. It was most consoling to know that the house is so cool and that you will not have to suffer as you did a year ago. It would be a real delight for me, if it pleased God, to spend some days down there with you. I would have fewer letters and business matters to attend to and be near the little ducks and the water, which must make you feel like hermits. I don't deserve this, but I am very happy that you can enjoy it for me.
2. You should know that I never thought I loved you so much, for I have a great desire to see you. Perhaps God will so ordain. I pray very much for you and have the satisfaction of knowing that he will assist you in everything. I have no worries about your helping those souls to attain a high perfection. But you must realize you cannot treat all the nuns alike. That sister to whom our padre gave the habit should be treated like someone who is sick; no demands should be made of her that require much perfection. It's enough that she does the best she can, as they say, and avoids offending God.
3. There is much to suffer everywhere, especially when beginning, for until a house is established we take in all the nuns we can, if they have the money, so as to supply for the needs of the others. Especially in this case it was right to take her for she contributed to the start of the foundation. Bear with her, my daughter, as best you can. If her soul is in a good state, consider how she is a dwelling place of God.
4. I praise him every time he sends some joy to our padre. So that you will do this, I tell you that our padre said you were one of the best prioresses. Since you are so alone, His Majesty helps you. Regarding the money you owe Malagón, don't worry about it. It's enough that you send it when you can.
5. Our padre is well, glory to God. But he has many trials, for, as you know, the nuncio died and Tostado, who is the vicar general sent by our Most Reverend Padre, is in Madrid. Although the king until now has not wanted him to carry on any visitations, we don't know how things will end up.
6. Our padre's commission has not ended even though the nuncio is dead, and so he is still visitator. I believe he is in Pastrana now. Much prayer is necessary so that what is for the greater service of God will be done. We are praying much here and have held processions. Don't neglect to do this, for the need is now great, although it appears that everything will turn out all right.
7. Despite all his troubles our padre has not failed to attend to the affairs of your house and has spoken twice with the bishop, who received him very graciously. He said he would do all that was required and he wrote himself to that lady. He sent me a letter here last week, but he was waiting for I don't know what. Our padre is very happy and he says that everything will be done well. Don't worry if there is a little delay, for I assure you things were done with great care. The income has been satisfactory. Don't be disturbed, for everything will be done promptly.
8. If you are happy with the postulants -- I mean, the elderly woman's daughters -- you don't have to do anything else than admit them to profession, even though they may have some infirmities, for there is no woman without them. The problem with my head is a little better, although I cannot write myself. I don't write to any monastery except through a secretary, unless in regard to something special, and thus I will finish this one myself.
9. What shall I say of the commotion caused by our illnesses, especially in Seville. The enclosed letter will inform you about them. I am sorry about Encarnación, although those are infirmities that diminish as one grows older. Give her and everyone else my best regards, especially the subprioress and the foundresses.
10. The presider in Malagón is Ana de la Madre de Dios. She is a very good religious and carries out her office well without deviating one iota from the Constitutions. In Seville they have many trials. The subprioress has been anointed, and the prioress has a continuing fever. So this is not the time to ask them for something. Remember that they bore the cost of your expenses from Seville. They are going to receive some postulants and they will pay you.
11. As for the fish you want to give us, that's a joke unless you find a way to ship it, for it would cost a lot to do that. Regarding the cloth underskirts of which our padre speaks, if you are unable to buy others for everyone at once, dispose of the cloth ones little by little until they are all gone. Sell them for as much as you can.
12. Be very gracious in everything with Doña Catalina de Otálora and strive to satisfy her. You know what we owe her, and ingratitude makes a bad impression. If she writes to one of the nuns, give the nun the letter and have her answer it. May our Lord make you very holy.
Madre Brianda sends her regards. Her condition is the same, which is bad.
Today is 2 July.
Your mother and sister are well.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
