To the Very Magnificent and Reverend Señor Licentiate Villanueva.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. Your letters brought me much distress. To think that in one of these houses things are worse than they are in any of the houses of calced nuns in Andalusia is like a death to me. I have had little luck with that house in Malagón. I don't know what terrible things the presider is doing to them that they should behave in the way you say they do in your letter to Mother Prioress. That which a superior like our padre said to them should have been enough to smooth things over. Their lack of intelligence is clearly evident and I cannot fail to blame you, for I know that you can do so much with them. If you had done what you did when they were tempted to rise up against Madre Brianda, things would be different.
2. What they will gain from all of this is that they will not see her again, even if God restores her to health, and will be left without your assistance, for this is the way God pays those who serve him badly. And you will see where such contentious people end up who are so troublesome a trial to me, and I beg you to tell this to Beatriz. My feelings toward her are such that I wouldn't even want to hear her name mentioned. I ask you to tell her that if she starts to oppose the presider or object to anything that is done in the house and I learn about it, she will pay dearly. Out of love for God, teach the nuns, as you have always done, to embrace the Lord if they want to have peace and not be going about so disturbed. Do you fear that there are others like Ana de Jesús? Indeed, I would rather see them worse than she has been than disobedient. The sight of one of them offending God makes me lose all patience, and the Lord gives me very much patience in everything else.
3. As for the possibility of Ana de Jesús receiving communion, it is certain that she can, for the case has been carefully studied. Now that she is able to, let things stand for a month to see how it goes. In this regard, refer to what Mother Prioress writes to you. Your not having been informed was a great mistake. You did well to give her communion since you had no further knowledge.
4. As for the curate, this is why I was fearful about Fray Francisco's departure, for not even the provincial wants them to confess always with the same confessor; nor does this seem good to me. I have already told you this. I regret the long conversations with the confessor. I will inform him of this because it is something to be careful about.
5. The presider told me that in a certain matter you were not in much agreement with her. She led me to think that you do not believe she is dealing openly with you. Her not being open with you seems wrong to me. I am going to write to her about this and other things in such a way that she will not know that you have written anything to me. It would be good if you spoke to her plainly and complain about how she acted with Ana de Jesús. If you do not disentangle what the devil has begun to put together, things will go from bad to worse and you will be unable to bear them with peace of soul. Although it will be distressing to me that you are leaving, I believe you are more obliged to preserve your own tranquility than to do me a favor. May the Lord grant us tranquility, as he can, amen.
I kiss the hands of those lords many times.
They say that even though the nuncio died, our padre's commission has not ceased and that he is still visitator. In certain respects I am very sorry about this.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
