For Mother Prioress, María de San José.
1. Jesus be with you, my daughter. By the fact that you tell me you are somewhat better, it seems I am capable of bearing everything willingly. May it please the Lord that you continue to improve and may he repay the doctor, for I am dutifully grateful to him.
2. It's amazing that the subprioress is still alive. He who made her can easily give her health, for he gave her being from nothing. He is truly exercising her in suffering as he is all of you. Enduring something like this makes one ready for anything, even going to Guinea or beyond. Nonetheless, I would like to see it over with, for it causes me much grief.
3. Since I told Madre Brianda to write about what is happening here, I will only mention the things I need to. Neither the pictures intended for Doña Luisa nor the letter arrived, nor did you mention whether you received the cloth and the crucifixes. Let me know in the next letter and pray for Brianda, for I am happy to see her so much better.
4. Accept the nun gladly, for the dowry you say she has is not a bad one. I wish that that widow had already entered. The other day I wrote to you to take the little black girl gladly, for she will not do you any harm, and her sister as well. Neither did you mention whether you received that letter. I was sorry about Garciálvarez's illness. Don't forget to tell me how he is and whether your improvement is continuing. I received the coconuts; and they are something to behold. I will send them to Doña Luisa. The one for me is beautifully decorated. Our padre says he will break it open tomorrow.
5. Regarding Paterna, he says not to talk about it until he goes there -- we spoke to him a lot about that today -- for everyone would be disturbed at the thought that he is not the visitator, and he is right.
6. May God repay you for all the gifts you give me -- you must dream of being a queen -- and for even sending the portage. For goodness' sake take care of yourself and take it easy, for I would be receiving a great gift by your doing that. The sisters were delighted to see the coconuts, and I too. May he be blessed who created it, for it is certainly something to behold. It pleased me how with all your trials you have the vitality to think of things like this. The Lord well knows whom he gives trials to.
7. Just now I have spoken to our padre about the aspirant proposed by the archbishop. I am very displeased to see how persistent they are in their entreaties while he does not favor it. Our padre says that he thinks she is a melancholic beata -- and with such we should have learned our lesson -- and it would be worse to send her away afterward. Try to speak to her a few times to see what she is like. And if you see that she is not for us, it wouldn't seem to me a bad idea for Padre Nicolao to speak to the archbishop and tell him about the bad luck we have with these beatas; or try to delay the decision.
8. It has been a long while since I wrote the enclosed letter to Fray Gregorio and sent it to our padre to send on to him, and now he returned it to me. It's dated, but don't fail to read it so that the foolish temptation you've had to leave the house you are in doesn't return. I am sorry about the great trial you will have with that sister, and I pity the poor little soul for what she suffers. May God provide a remedy. Give everyone my regards. It would be a great consolation for me to see you, for I find few nuns so pleasing to me, and I love you greatly. The Lord can do all.
9. Best regards to Padre Garciálvarez and to Beatriz, her mother and the others, to whom I say that they need to be very perfect. The reason is that the Lord is beginning this foundation with them and has deprived them of their support. I don't know how you are able to manage everything. It's true that it would have been worse for you if you had to deal with calced nuns as was the case elsewhere. For, after all, your nuns will follow the path you point out to them. The worse thing is that you have to undergo everything with poor health. My experience is that when one's health is good, everything is bearable. May God grant it to you, my daughter, as I desire and beg of him, amen.
Today is 11 July.
Your reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus
10. Since our padre was here, he opened the package and gave me the letters, but kept the pictures and must have forgotten. I accidently found this out today, for he and Padre Antonio were arguing over them. I saw two and they were beautiful.
