To the Most Illustrious and Most Reverend Señor Don Alvaro de Mendoza, Bishop of Avila, my lord, in Olmedo.
1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your lordship, amen. I have recovered from the illness I had, although not from the noise in my head, which always torments me. But just to know you are in good health I would willingly suffer greater ills.
2. I kiss your lordship's hands many times for the favor you show me by your letters, which are a great consolation for us. The nuns have also received their letters, and they have come and shown them to me feeling highly favored, and rightly so.
3. If you had seen how necessary it was for a visitation to be made by someone who knew how to explain the constitutions, and was also familiar with them through practice, I think you would have been very happy. And you would have realized what a great service you rendered to our Lord and all the good you did for this house by not leaving it under the power of someone incapable of recognizing the way in which the devil could begin to meddle, and indeed had begun to do so. Thus far no one was at fault since their intentions were all good. Indeed, I cannot thank God enough.
4. As for our needs, we will not suffer from any want. If in some need the bishop will not help the house, you should not be disturbed. The monasteries can come to the help of each other, which is better than their relying on someone who doesn't show the love for us that you have shown throughout your entire life. If only we had you here and could enjoy your presence -- and this is what makes us sad. As for the rest, it seems we have made no changes, for we are as always your subjects. And all the superiors will also be, especially Padre Gracián, who seems to have caught the love that we have for you.
5. Today I sent him your letter, for he is not here. He went to Alcalá to dispatch those who are going to Rome. The sisters have been very happy with him. Indeed, he is a great servant of God. But for them it is also a real help to see that in everything he follows what you have set down.
6. In regard to that lady, I will try to do what you ask, if the occasion arises, for the person who informed me does not usually come to this house. But from what could be gathered the matter has nothing to do with a wedding. After reading your letter, I wonder if, in fact, it is about a wedding that someone was trying to prevent. I don't think, though, that the one with whom I spoke is zealous for anything else than God and the common good. May His Majesty guide matters for his greater service since things have already reached such a point that even if you do not so wish you will be involved. I am greatly consoled that you are free enough not to feel disturbed. Consider whether it wouldn't be good to warn the abbess and to show that you are very displeased with the party who intervened to see if that wouldn't be of some help. I tell you this was strongly recommended to me.
7. As for the matter concerning Maestro Daza, I don't know what to say, so great is my desire that you do something for him, for I see his good will toward you. Even if what you do amounts to little, I would be happy. He is so devoted to you, he says, that if he thought you found him bothersome by his asking for such favors he wouldn't stop serving you but try never to ask you for any favors. Since his devotion to you is so great and he sees that you are doing favors for others and have done so in the past, he is a little upset and thinks he is one of the unlucky ones.
8. With regard to the canonry, he is writing to you himself to explain. If he could be certain that you would favor him if some vacancy were to arise before you leave, he would be happy. And I would be happy because I believe this would be pleasing to God and to everyone -- and truly you owe it to him. Please God this will be possible so that you will leave everyone satisfied. Even if it means something less than a canonry, I think he would accept it gladly. Well, not everyone has the detached love for you that your discalced nuns do, for all we want is that you love us and that God preserve you for us very many years.
9. My brother readily shares these sentiments. He is now in the parlor. He kisses your hands many times; and Teresa, your feet. We are all embarrassed that you ask again for prayers, for we would be offended to think that you do not know we are always praying for you. They are in a hurry for this letter, so I cannot go on any longer. I think that if you tell Maestro Daza that if a vacancy arises you will give it to him, he will be content.
Your lordship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
