1. Jesus be always with your lordship. The marriage of Señora Doña María made me very happy. Truly, despite my great joy, I could not completely believe it was happening. So it was a real relief for me to learn of it from your letter. May God be blessed for such a great favor, since these past days I have been anxious and worried longing to see you free of such a great concern. And it came about at so little cost to you, for I've been told that it is quite an honorable marriage. As for the rest, not everything can be perfect; it would have been much more troublesome had he been very young. Wives are treated much better by someone who is mature in age. This would be particularly true in the case of a wife who has as many reasons to be loved as she has. May it please the Lord that they have a happy life together, for I don't know what else could have given me so much pleasure at this time.
2. I have been distressed about Señora Doña María's illness. Please God, it will not be as serious as it usually is. Here we are taking more care than usual to pray for her.
3. May our Lord reward you for the alms. It came just at the right time, for we had no one to turn to, although I wasn't too worried. Francisco de Salcedo was more anxious than we were, for we always trust in God. The other day he told me that he wanted to write to you and only say in the letter, "Lord, we have no bread." I did not allow him, for my desire to see you free of debts is such that I would rather we suffer want than be the cause of an increase in your expenses. But since God gives you so much charity, I hope that His Majesty will provide for you in other ways. May he be pleased to preserve you for many years and bring me to a place where I might enjoy your company.
4. Padre Gracián is determined not to allow me to go to the Incarnation. But it is God whom I fear, even though nothing would be worse for us at present. I am delighted that you are being careful about your most generous nature and avoiding occasions like the festival. May it please God that this will be for your good and may he watch over you more than me.
Today is 6 September.
Your lordship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
5. Teresa kisses your hands and is doing what you ordered her to do; she would gladly go with you.
