To the very magnificent and most reverend lord and padre mio, in Granada.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your honor, mi padre. Today, the vigil of the Conception, I received a letter from you. May the Lord repay you for the consolation it gave me. This was necessary, for you should know that for more than three months, it seems, hosts of demons have joined against the discalced friars and nuns. They have stirred up so many persecutions and calumnies against us nuns as well as Padre Gracián, and these are so hard to stomach, that all we can do is take refuge in God. As a result, I believe he has heard our prayer, for the nuns are, after all, good souls. Those who sent memoranda to the king have retracted their words about the lovely exploits they attributed to us. The truth is a great thing and these sisters above all rejoice in it. As for me, it matters little. I've grown used to such things, and it's not surprising that they leave me untouched.
2. Now, to top things off, the nuns at the Incarnation have agreed to vote for me for prioress, and though I received fourteen or fifteen more votes than needed, the friars so conspired that another nun who had fewer votes was elected and confirmed. And the friars would have done me a great favor, provided everything had proceeded peacefully.
3. Since the nuns did not want to obey the newly-confirmed prioress except as vicaress, they were all excommunicated -- more than fifty of them. Although in fact, according to learned men, they were not really excommunicated, they have nonetheless had to undergo two months without being able to attend Mass or speak to their confessors, and they are in anguish. Although the nuncio has now given orders for them to be absolved, they are still in the same situation. Just think, what a life it is, to see all of this going on!
4. The case has now gone to the royal council. Although it is very troubling to see this, it's much preferable to my having to go there. Pray for me, for goodness' sake, for until we become a separate province I don't think we will ever have peace. The devil is trying to prevent this as much as he can.
5. Oh, if I could only speak to you to give you an account of so many things. What is happening and has happened is such a story that I don't know where it will end. When there is some news, I will write to you at length, for they tell me the letters are being delivered safely. It would have been a great help for me to know that you had such a friend in Madrid, but perhaps I still may look to benefit from his help.
6. I wrote to you at length from Toledo. You didn't tell me whether you received the letter. It wouldn't be surprising -- with my luck -- that you went there, now that I am here. Indeed, it would have meant a little comfort for my soul!
7. Peralta is very grateful to Carillo for what has been done for his relative, not because of concern for her, but because he ascertains that in everything his will is being done. If you should see him, tell him this and that, after all, in no friend does he find so much loyalty.
8. It truly seems that he arranged this friendship. Inform him that the matter written about from Toledo to that person was never resolved successfully. It is known for sure that the jewel is in his hands and that he praises it highly. So until he tires of it he will not give it over. He said that he wants to examine it carefully. It is said that if Señor Carillo were to come here he would see another which -- insofar as one can tell -- has many advantages over the previous one. It deals with nothing else but who he is; and it does so with more exquisite enameling and decoration. The jeweler did not know as much at that time, and the gold is of a finer quality, although the precious stones do not stand out as they did in the previous piece. It was done by order of the glassmaker, and that is evident according to what they say.
9. I don't know what got me into writing so much at length. I have always been fond of reaching my goal even when it's at a cost to me. Since he is a friend of yours, you will not tire of delivering these messages.
10. It is said also that one has not written to you through that person, because it would have been only a matter of courtesy and nothing more. Always tell whether you are in good health. I am happy to see that you are almost free of worry. That is not the case with me, but not knowing how, I am at peace and -- glory to God -- nothing takes it away from me. This noise in my head is distressing to me, for it is constant.
11. Don't forget to pray for me and this order, for there is great need. May His Majesty keep you as holy as I beg of him, amen.
12. These sisters send many regards. They are very good souls. All of us consider ourselves your daughters, especially I myself.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
