1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be always with your honor, amen. Mother Prioress has already written me of how everything was done, and others also have written. May our Lord be praised forever. I have been greatly consoled -- above all with the good news Mother Prioress tells me about Sister Isabel de los Angeles. May it please our Lord to watch over her and Sister San Francisco as well, with whom the community is also very happy.
2. It is no wonder that this caused a stir and aroused devotion. Because of our sins, the world is such that among those with the means to be well-off, as they think, only a few embrace the cross of our Lord; and it would be a much heavier burden for them to have to remain in the world. Here, too, from what I see, the news we received from up there will benefit us. I share in your happiness and that of Señora Doña María. Please remember me in your prayers.
3. It's clear she was in good company from the way she has understood the truth. As for the rest, certainly in anything that is of service to our Lord, the devil will try to use his power under the guise of many attractive colors. He has done a great deal here. In some way the nuns are right. They think that since they have to live on alms in these houses they would find themselves in trouble were others to see that the well-off take an interest in us. It may be possible to get along for a while, but soon the truth will be known. In sum, these are serious matters and an agreement cannot be reached so quickly. Glory be to the Lord since all has turned out so well. May it please His Majesty to give you all a long life to enjoy, and that you build a house for so great a King, for I hope in His Majesty that he will repay each of you with another house that will have no end.
4. I have received good news about Padre Fray Juan de Montalvo, although I have not seen a letter from him since I've arrived here. I thought he was up there. You are doing us a great favor by leaving the matter of the chaplain in such good hands. If the one of whom you speak has the required qualities, it matters little that he is young. May our Lord direct this as he has directed everything else.
5. As for the nuns, you are right; that is what is appropriate. For now, they must take no more than two. I am writing to Mother Prioress about this because our number should not exceed thirteen, and when these two enter, that number will have been reached. May His Majesty choose them and always protect you, amen. Would you please send these letters without delay to Mother Prioress.
Today is 18 October, the very day in which I received your letter.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
