1. Jesus be with you, my daughter. Oh, how long it's been since I've received a letter from you, and how far away it seems that I am up here. Even were I close, it would have been difficult to write you these past days because of all the turmoil going on, about which you will be informed in this letter. I tell you the Lord has not left me idle. Before I forget, with regard to the agnusdei, I would like to see it decorated with pearls. If something pleases you, you don't have to ask me about it, for I am happy if you are. May you enjoy much happiness.
2. I would have wanted that in the midst of those disturbances -- for they tell me the province is getting stirred up again -- the nuns in Paterna be brought back quickly; this is something I strongly desire. Our padre has written me that he wrote telling you to do this, with the consent of the archbishop. Try to obtain it before other hindrances arise.
3. Here they are reminding me to ask you for a little caraña because it's very helpful to me. It must be of pure quality. Don't forget, for goodness' sake. You can send it well wrapped to Toledo, for they will send it on to me. Or it's enough to entrust it to the man from here when he returns.
4. Don't fail to be most diligent regarding the nuns in Paterna, for apart from the nuns themselves, I would like this for your sake. I don't know how you've been able to get along without them. Now my companion will tell you the story of our trials.
5. Write and tell me whether you have paid for that house or have any money left and why you are in a hurry to move. Tell me about it all, for the prior of Las Cuevas is writing me about it.
6. You should know that the nuns at the Incarnation have been absolved after almost two months of excommunication in which they underwent much anguish. The king commanded that the nuncio give orders to absolve them. Tostado and his councilors sent a prior from Toledo for this purpose, and he absolved them with so many constrictions that it would take a long time to list them all, and he left them more disturbed and dejected than before. And all of this happened because they did not want the prioress the superiors wanted, but me. And the two discalced friars that had been placed there by the apostolic commissary and the previous nuncio were taken away and imprisoned as though they were criminals. I am terribly distressed and will be so until I see them freed from the power of those people. I would rather see them in the land of the Moors.
7. It is said that on the day they were captured, they were flogged twice. They are receiving the worst treatment possible. Maldonado -- the prior of Toledo -- took Padre Fray John of the Cross to present him to Tostado. The prior here took Fray Germán to San Pablo de la Moraleja. And when he returned he told the nuns that were on his side that he left that traitor in good hands. They said that blood was coming from his mouth as he was taken away.
8. The nuns are suffering over this, more so than from all their other trials, which are heavy. For goodness' sake pray for them and for those saintly captives, for tomorrow it will be eight days since they were seized. The nuns say they are saints and that in all the years the friars were there they behaved in every way like apostles. I don't know where the crazy ideas of those people are going to end up. May God in his mercy provide the remedy he sees as necessary.
9. Give my best regards to Padre Fray Gregorio. Tell him to have prayers said to God concerning all these trials, for it is a great pity to see what these nuns are suffering; they are martyrs. I am not writing to him, because I did so a short time ago. The letter for him went along with the one I sent you. My best regards to my Gabriela and to all the nuns. May God be with you all.
Today is 10 December.
10. I can't figure out how you are going to get the money to buy another house, for I don't even remember if the one you are in is paid for. It seems to me you told me the interest has been paid off. But if this postulant doesn't want to become a nun, she will clearly want her money back, especially if her sister gets married. Keep me fully informed about everything, for goodness' sake, for through Padre Padilla the letters arrive safely as long as they are sent to the archbishop. Or send them through our padre, and then they arrive sooner than when sent by way of Toledo.
11. If you have so much money, don't forget what you owe my brother. He is paying five hundred ducats interest on a property he bought. It would be a great help to him even if you sent only two hundred ducats, for he has received nothing from the Indies.
12. Let me know also how the uprising in the province is going and whom they made vicar, and give my regards to Padre Evangelista and tell him that God is giving him good opportunities for becoming a saint. Tell me all about your health and give me news about the nuns. And if you don't have time, let my Gabriela write me about it.
13. Many greetings to Beatriz and to Señor Garciálvarez; I was very sorry about his illness. My greetings to all the nuns and to Padre Nicolao. May God watch over you for me.
Your servant,
Teresa of Jesus
14. Be careful to take good care of your health, for now you see how important that is. Perhaps you will move to a house where you will roast alive. Consider the great comfort you have in the one you now occupy; and it is new. It could be that you will become so stubborn that I will let you buy one. I surely want you to be at peace. But you saw all the boasting about how good the first one was.
