1. Jesus be always with your reverence, my daughter. I received yours, and with it the potatoes, the keg, and seven lemons. Everything arrived in good condition. But the portage cost so much that there is no reason for you to be sending me anything any more; it's a matter of conscience.
2. A little over eight days ago I wrote to you by way of Madrid, and so I will not be long. There is nothing new as regards the business spoken of in that letter and about which we are very distressed. Although it's sixteen days from today that our two friars have been taken captive, we don't know if they have been released, although we trust in God that he will provide a remedy.
3. Since Christmas is now coming and since matters of justice cannot be handled until after the feast of Epiphany, the delay will amount to a long time for those who are suffering, if the matter hasn't been settled yet. And these nuns at the Incarnation are also very distressed, for they are in anguish over so many trials, and more so because these holy confessors have been removed and held under such constraint. For goodness' sake, pray for them all, for what they are suffering is a great pity.
4. I rejoice that you and all the sisters are well and that the good work Bernarda did for us has been discovered. Please God the widow will do what you said about not asking them for money. I wrote to the prior of Las Cuevas when I wrote to you. I sent the letter by way of Madrid, as I said. And since I don't know if this messenger is dependable, I'm saying no more.
5. My regards to Padre Garciálvarez and to Padre Fray Gregorio, whose letter -- with which I was delighted -- I am not answering for the reason I mentioned. I will try to see if anyone here knows that rector and have them write to him. Best regards to my Gabriela, whose letter was a delight for me. Regards to all the sisters and give Doña Leonor every best wish from me that you like, and let her know how consoling it is for me to learn of her great charity toward your house. And now that you may know how things stand, the portage for all that you sent me came to twelve reales. The package was very loosely bound; I don't know why.
Remain with God; may he give all of you as happy a Christmas as I want you to have.
Today is 19 December.
6. Teresa and all the nuns send their best regards. This head of mine is in a wretched state -- I don't know how you have understood it to be otherwise -- and so many trials have come together that at times I feel exhausted. I don't know when this letter will reach you or if this is a safe way to send it. My brother is well. Don't forget to remember me to all the nuns, and tell those from Paterna that I enjoyed their songs and that from what we can gather their hopes will soon prove vain and they will see this clearly. I give you permission to tell them all that you wish as coming from me.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
7. Note that I am seriously ordering you to obey Gabriela in whatever has to do with the treatment prescribed for you, just as I am ordering her to take care of you, for she sees how important your health is to us.
