1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your most illustrious lordship, amen. I received your letter more than two months ago and I wanted so much to answer immediately, but I was waiting for some calm to return in the midst of the great trials that the discalced friars and nuns have been undergoing since August. I wanted to send you some news, as you requested in your letter, but was waiting before doing so. However, up to the present things have been getting worse by the day, as I will explain later.
2. Now there is nothing more I want than to see you, for I can only poorly describe in writing the happiness your letter -- which I received this week from Father Rector --  brought me. And this, even though I had received very clear news about you more than three weeks ago, and afterward the same news from another source. So I don't know how you could think that something of that sort would be kept secret. May it please the Divine Majesty that this redound to his greater honor and glory and help you grow very much in holiness, as I think it will. Believe that God will not fail to hear such fervent petitions made by souls who in their prayers desire nothing more than that he be served. And I, although miserable, pray continually for this, and so do all these servants of yours in all these monasteries. Each day I find in them souls that certainly put me to shame. It definitely seems that our Lord himself is choosing them, bringing them to these houses from places where I do not know how they could have heard of us.
3. You must take heart and not even let the thought cross your mind that this was not ordained by God -- I am certain it was. His Majesty is now giving you the chance to put into practice the desire you have had to serve him. You have been idle for a long time and our Lord is in great need of someone who will favor virtue. We poor and lowly people, however much we want only what is for his service, can do little if God does not awaken someone to defend us. And so he chooses one who he knows can help him. For malice has reached such a point, and ambition and the pursuit of honor have been so canonized by many of those who should have trampled them underfoot, that even the Lord himself seems to want the help of his creatures, although he is powerful enough for virtue to win the victory without them. Since those he has selected to defend virtue disappoint him, he has chosen those he knows can help him.
4. Strive to spend yourself in this work, as I know you will. God will give you the strength and health -- I hope for this from His Majesty -- and grace to succeed in everything. Here we will serve you by begging him unceasingly. And may it please the Lord to give you helpers interested in the good of souls so that you can go on without worry. I am greatly consoled that you can count so much on the Society; they are a wonderful help in everything.
5. The happy outcome for my lady the Marchioness of Elche brought me much joy, for that affair caused me a good deal of distress and worry until I learned of how well things turned out. May God be praised. As often as the Lord gives such a multiplicity of trials together, he usually causes good results. Since he knows we are so weak and does everything for our good, he measures out suffering in conformity with our strength. I think these storms that are lasting so long have to happen to us. If I were not certain that these discalced friars and nuns are striving to keep their rule in uprightness and truth, I would sometimes fear that the calced friars might succeed -- considering the devil's wiles -- in achieving their goal, which is to put an end to this beginning that the Blessed Virgin has initiated. God has given the devil the leeway to work toward this end.
6. Great effort and many plans have gone into discrediting us, especially Padre Gracián and me, the ones at whom they strike. I tell you that they have spread so many calumnies against this man and sent so many accusations to the king, very serious ones (and about these monasteries of discalced nuns), that you would be shocked if you knew about them and that they could invent so much evil. To my mind we have gained a great deal through all of this. The nuns go about so joyful that the matter doesn't even seem to touch them. Padre Gracián bears everything with such perfection that I am amazed. God has stored a great treasure in that soul, for he prays especially for his accusers and has borne their calumnies with the joy of a St. Jerome.
7. Only the matters that involved the discalced nuns caused him distress. Since for two years he has been their visitator and knows them, he cannot bear what is said; he considers them angels, and this is what he calls them. God was pleased that the things said against us were retracted by those who said them. As for the other things said about Padre Gracián, an inquiry was made by order of the council and the truth became known. Other things, too, were retracted, and the prejudice spreading through Madrid was recognized. Believe me, the devil was trying to get rid of the good that these houses are doing.
8. Now, besides what was done against these poor nuns at the Incarnation who, to pay for their sins, elected me as prioress (that is, judicial proceedings were initiated), the whole city is shocked by what they have suffered and are suffering. And I still do not know when it will all end. Padre Tostado's severity toward them has been unusual. For more than fifty days he has refused to allow them to hear Mass, and for three months now they have not been allowed to see anyone. He has been saying daily, with great threats, that they are excommunicated, but all the theologians in Avila deny this. The excommunication warning was directed toward preventing them from electing anyone outside the house. With a statement like that, no mention had to be made of me. The nuns thought that since I was a professed nun from that house and had lived so many years in it, they did not need to consider me as someone outside the house. In fact, if I wanted to return to that house, I could, for my dowry is there and I do not belong to a different province. Another nun who had less than a majority of votes was confirmed in the office of prioress. Those being punished have appealed their case to the royal council. I don't know how it will end.
9. It hurts me deeply to witness so much disturbance and scandal in the city on my account and so many anxious souls, for there were more than fifty-four nuns excommunicated. My only consolation was that I did all I could to prevent the nuns from electing me. And I guarantee you that one of the greatest trials that could come to me on this earth would be to see myself at the Incarnation. I didn't have an hour of good health all the time I was there.
10. I greatly pity those souls. Among them are nuns who have attained great perfection, and this is evident in the way they have borne their trials. Yet what has most distressed me is that the two discalced friars who were confessors there have been held captive more than a month by those of the cloth, under orders from Padre Tostado. The two are excellent religious and have edified the entire city during their five years there. Because of their presence the house has remained in the state it was when I left it. One of them, at least, whose name is Fray John of the Cross, is considered a saint by everyone, men and women alike, and I don't think they exaggerate. In my opinion, he is a gem. Since they were appointed to that position by both the Dominican apostolic visitator and the previous nuncio and were subject to the visitator Gracián, what was done is so absurd it is frightening. I don't know where it will end. What pains me is that they have been taken away and we don't know where. Moreover it is feared that they are being treated harshly, and I'm afraid something unfortunate will happen. A protest about this has also gone to the royal council. May God provide a remedy.
11. Pardon me for going on at such length, but it is gratifying to me that if Padre Tostado goes there you know the truth about what is happening. The nuncio favored him very much as soon as he arrived and told Padre Gracián to stop making visitations. This does not take away Gracián's appointment as apostolic commissary, for the nuncio did not show his faculties nor, according to what Gracián says, take Gracián's away. Nonetheless, Gracián went immediately to Alcalá, and lived in a cave there as he did in Pastrana, suffering, as I said, abominable calumnies. He no longer exercises his position as commissary, but he stays there and has suspended all activity. His great desire is to be free of having to make any more visitations. This is what we all want, for they are the cause of many troubles for us -- unless God gives us the grace to form a separate province; otherwise I don't know where things will end. On arriving there he wrote to me that if Padre Tostado makes a visitation, he is determined to obey him and that all of us nuns should do so too.
12. Padre Tostado did not go there, nor has he come here. I think the Lord prevented this, for with the bad will he later showed, I believe it would have been very harmful for us. Nonetheless, those of the cloth say that Padre Gracián is directing everything and preparing to make a visitation, which is what is killing us. Truly no other reason lies behind this than the one I have told you. In a certain way I have found rest in the thought that you know this whole story, although you may not find reading it so restful since you feel most obliged to favor this order. I also wanted you to be aware of the obstacles that stand in the way of your desire that we come to Portugal, and others exist as well that I'll now mention, which cause us another embroilment.
13. Since I cannot but strive in every possible way to prevent the ruin of this good beginning, nor has any learned confessor of mine counseled me otherwise, these calced Fathers are very displeased with me and have informed our Father General so that he convened a general chapter, which has taken place. This chapter ordained, and our Father General gave the orders, that no discalced nun could leave her house, and especially that I should choose a house to my liking and remain there under pain of excommunication.
14. Clearly the purpose is to prevent any more foundations of nuns. It is a pity to see how many are crying out to enter these monasteries, which are so few, and that no more requests can be accepted. Although the previous nuncio, after all that I mentioned, gave me orders not to stop making foundations, and I have ample patent letters from the visitators to make them, I am very determined not to do so unless either our Father General or the pope ordains otherwise. Since nothing of this comes through my fault, I see it as a favor from God, for I was already very tired out. Nevertheless, to be of service to you would mean nothing but rest for me -- it's hard to think of not being able to see you again -- and were I given the command to undertake such a service, it would bring me great consolation. But even if this decision of the general chapter had not been made, the patent letters I received from the general were valid only for the kingdoms of Castile. A new mandate would be necessary.
15. I am certain that for now our Father General would not give it. Getting the approval of the pope would be easy, though, especially if he saw the document prepared by order of Padre Gracián about how life is lived in these monasteries, and the benefit that others receive in places where these are found. So great is the benefit that it is said, even by serious-minded people, that this alone would be enough to canonize the nuns. Because I fear it may say too many good things about me, I have not read it. But I would want authorization from Father General before making the foundation and that he be asked to approve of our continuing to make foundations in Spain, for there are nuns who could do this without my going out to do so. I mean that once the house is ready the nuns could be sent there, for souls are being deprived of much benefit. If you are acquainted with the protector of our order, who they say is the pope's nephew, he could obtain the permission from our Father General. I think you would be rendering a great service to our Lord and doing this order a great favor if you obtained it.
16. There is another drawback -- I want you to be informed about everything -- which is that Padre Tostado has already been accepted as vicar general for the kingdom of Portugal, and it would be most unpleasant, especially for me, to fall into his hands. I think he would make every effort to block a foundation. In Castile, it now seems, he doesn't have such power. Since he exercised his office without first having shown his faculties (especially in regard to the problems at the Incarnation, which made a bad impression), he was ordered by royal decree to hand over his faculties to the royal council -- he had received another notification last summer -- and they have not returned them to him, nor do I think they will.
17. We also have letters from the apostolic visitators that in these monasteries the official visitator must receive the task from Father General and be a discalced friar. With nothing like this happening there in Portugal, we would be subject to "those of the cloth," and perfection would soon go crashing to the ground. Here they were beginning to do us much harm, but the apostolic commissaries came along. You can consider what the remedy might be for all these obstacles, for there will be no lack of good nuns ready to serve you. Padre Julián de Avila, who already seems set to start on the road, kisses your hands. He is very happy with the news about your appointment. He already knew about it since I had told him before. He is very confident that you will gain much in the sight of the Lord because of your care for this new foundation.
18. María de San Jerónimo, who is the one who was subprioress in this house, also kisses your hands. She says she would be eager to go to serve you, if our Lord so ordains. May His Majesty guide everything for his glory and watch over you with a great increase of his love.
19. It is no surprise that now in the midst of such news you cannot enjoy the recollection you desire. Our Lord will give you a double measure as he usually does when recollection is set aside for his service, although I do desire that you procure some time for yourself, for in this lies all our good.
From this house of St. Joseph's in Avila, 16 January.
I beg you, for the love of our Lord, not to torment me with those titles.
Your most illustrious lordship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
