1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I read Father Provincial's letter more than twice, and I always find in it such a lack of openness and so much certitude about what never entered my mind that you should not find the distress it caused me surprising. But that doesn't matter. If I were not so imperfect, I would be delighted to suffer this mortification from you. Since I am your subject, you can mortify me. And since Padre Salazar is also a subject, it occurs to me that his plan should be cut short by his superior. This would be a better solution than having me write to those who are not subject to me to do what you want. This would be the task of their own superior, and they would be right in not paying much attention to anything I might say.
2. Certainly, I don't see any better thing to do. Nor do I understand your reasons for wanting me to write. Unless I could say I had a report from heaven that he should not do such a thing, there is nothing for me to do. As I have told you, there is no reason to go into detail about everything, for this would be offensive to someone to whom I owe a solid friendship. This is especially so, since as you said it is certain that from what he says and I understand, he would not make this change without informing his provincial. And if he has not said or written anything to him, it is because he is not going to transfer. And if the provincial can prevent him by not giving him permission, I would be offending a man of dignity and a good servant of God by defaming him in all our monasteries (assuming they pay any attention to me), because it is a detestable accusation to say that he wants to do something that he cannot do without offending God.
3. I have spoken to you in all truthfulness and, in my opinion, I have done what I was obliged to do as an honorable person and as a Christian (the Lord knows I am speaking the truth here). To do more than what I have done, I think, would go contrary to the honorable and Christian thing to do.
4. I have told you that when I do something that I think I must, God gives me the courage to undergo with his help all the conflicts that arise. At least I will not complain that they were not foretold to me or that I failed to do all I could, as I said. You would have had more fault for giving such an order than I for not obeying it.
5. I am also sure that if things should not turn out the way you want, I would be blamed just as much as if I had done nothing. Just to have spoken about the matter suffices for the prophecies to begin to be fulfilled. Well and good if trials come to me. I have committed enough offenses against the Divine Majesty to deserve more than might come.
6. But I do not think I deserve to receive trials from the Society, even were I to have had a part in this matter. It has little importance as far as your concerns go. Your foundations are from a higher source. May it please the Lord that mine will consist in never deviating from his will and that he always give you light for the same resolve. It would be a great consolation for me if our Father Provincial were to come here. For a long while now the Lord has not desired to comfort me with a visit from him.
Your honor's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
