1. May the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. I received two of your letters a short time ago, the one that you wrote on the last day of carnival, and the other which contained a letter for the sisters from their pastor. Please God we will clothe him as well as you describe, but I believe he will give us much more than we will give to him. The little notebook is also very good.
2. I don't know how Paul can say that he doesn't know anything about the prayer of union, for that luminous darkness and the loving impulses lead one to the opposite conclusion. But afterward, since the experience goes away and is different, he does not completely understand it. I greatly envy the souls who will make progress through his help and am sorry to see myself here without doing anything else but eat, sleep, and talk about these fathers, our brothers. The occasion to do this is ever present as you will see from the enclosed page, for I asked Sister Catalina to write to you about what is happening so as not to tire myself, for it is late and we are going to have a sermon this evening by Maestro Daza who is a very good preacher. The Dominicans are very charitable toward us; they preach two sermons a week for us, and those of the Society one.
3. I often remember your sermons, and I don't know what it is that prompts you to go from place to place, for the latest calumnies against you really distressed me. May God watch over you, mi padre. The times have become so dangerous that it is temerarious to travel about from place to place, for there are souls everywhere. Please God that what appears to be much zeal may not turn out to be a temptation that will cost us dearly. In that place where you are, one cat would be enough, besides the other Franciscans and Dominicans that I think are there, although I cannot imagine that blessed man as preaching well. Give him my regards and let me know if they listen to him. But notice my curiosity! Don't tell me and tear this up lest because of my sins it fall into his hands. About your eating in the hospital and those miserable codfish pies, how you made us laugh! But the things they said about you make me hope you will be more careful in the future.
4. Carillo, in his response to my first letter to him in which I told him the devil was tempting him and many other things as well, is right in saying that I have little courage. He says my letter made him laugh and that it did neither little nor much to induce him to change his mind. He says I'm like a mouse afraid of the cats and that he made his promise while holding the Blessed Sacrament in his hands and that the whole world would not suffice to make him renounce it. I tell you this frightens me, for his brothers say that he and whoever clothes him in that habit will be excommunicated. He says he already has the permission from his provincial and that you wrote him a letter and that although, like a man, you are afraid, you write like an angel. And he is right, for your letter is like that.
5. His brothers are being difficult in asking that we not accept him. This must be because they don't think we can do so. Judging by their concern, I believe they may have already written you that you should inform the monasteries. They have pressed me so much that I told them I had written to you about the matter.
6. Really, if it must be done and it can be, as he says, it would be much better to have the deed done before informing the monasteries and all the resulting commotion. I don't know what you are going to do, but if the transfer is something possible, in conscience we would have to accept him. I truly believe from the way in which he describes his situation that no one will block him, and so it would be better to delay if nothing has been done yet. May the Lord direct matters, for the more that obstacles are placed before him, the more it seems to me that God will be served and that the devil wants to prevent this from happening. They must be afraid that he will not be the only one. But they are so numerous that the loss of some will not matter, even if it be of those you mention.
7. In what you write about Paul's scruples, whether or not he can use his power, it seems to me that he was the prey of a little melancholy when he wrote that letter and is so whenever he has scruples. The reasons he gives for using his power are clear, and so I do not want to inquire again about the matter. From what Ardapilla says, these doubts will not last long, for the memorandum from the great angel has been sent by Gilbert and is expected any day.
8. I was pleased about Elías's fears over your absence. There is everything to fear over one who takes these risks. May it please the Lord to free Paul from them, for their blindness is so great that nothing they might do would surprise me. What worries me more is the one who does not fear and goes from place to place without necessity.
9. Returning to what I was saying, I already wrote to Paul some time ago that a very learned Dominican whom I told about all that happened with Methuselah, informed me, I believe, that it had no binding force. He told me that Methuselah was obliged to show his authorization for doing what he did. For the present there is no need to be talking about it any further.
10. I would like to send you a letter from the prioress of Valladolid in which she speaks of the commotion stirred up by the Carillo matter. Well, she thinks the Jesuit Fathers are very content with me and the discalced nuns. I think that all the threats will come to naught. What worries me and makes me fear and what I wish you would examine carefully and clarify is whether he can do what he wants without offending God or incurring excommunication. For if what the Jesuits say is true, you can in no way accept him. If the Count of Tendilla goes to Rome -- and even if he doesn't go personally -- I believe that the permission will certainly be granted, judging by the report he is writing.
11. I was delighted with our good luck that he is going to Rome, for our friars can go along with him. May the Lord direct it all and protect you for me. I don't know if I answered everything, for I don't have any more time. But see how brief I am when I don't have time!
12. All the nuns ask for your prayers and have been delighted with the tasks you are giving them. I have not seen Doña Guiomar; only rarely does she come here, for she is very sick.
Today is the second of March.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and true daughter -- especially the latter, for I am hardly this with the other fathers.
Teresa of Jesus
13. I am very sorry that Padre Mariano feels so weak. Make him eat well and don't let him think at all about going to Rome, for his health is more important. Oh, how long it is taking your sister to come and how much she is desired!
My Isabelita is doing very well, they tell me.
