To the very magnificent Señor Roque de Huerta, chief forest guard of the woods.
1. Jesus be ever with your honor, amen. Tomorrow, Monday, marks the eighth day since I wrote by way of the carrier from here informing you about what took place as regards the provincial Magdaleno, and I sent you the ordinance and notification given him. I don't know whether you have received these. I would very much appreciate your letting me know, for I am worried. What happened afterward you will see through these notes. I feel very sorry for these nuns, so much so that I don't know what to say, except that God must love them very much because he gives them so many and such long-lasting trials.
2. All these ten days since the provincial and Valdemoro have been here, they have done nothing but busy themselves with schemes, threaten the nuns, and seek out persons who will tell them about the penalties reserved for them if they do not obey and cast a vote contrary to the previous one they signed in an appeal to the royal council. Now that he has accomplished all that he wanted, the provincial is in a great hurry to go to Madrid to present the nuns' signatures to the council. I beg your honor, for goodness' sake, to do what is required to make the truth known and tell about how the signatures were obtained by force. This would be a great help to these poor nuns so that the council doesn't think the information presented by the Fathers is true, for all the things that were done added up to tyranny. If it is possible for Señor Padilla to see these notes, show them to him.
3. Here Magdaleno has said that he definitely carries a royal ordinance to imprison Padilla if he should find him here, that he was two leagues distant from Madrid when they called him back to give it to him, that Tostado has full powers over both the calced and the discalced Carmelites, and that Padre Fray John of the Cross has already been sent to Rome. May God in his power deliver him, and grant grace to your honor.
8 March
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
4. For the love of God I beg you to strive to make known briefly to the members of the council the force that was used with the nuns, for this is a very important point of the entire affair. It is a great wrong that they can get away with doing whatever they want, carrying on without justice and without truth in everything they have done, and there is no one showing compassion for these martyrs.
5. This was written three days ago, and that provincial is still tormenting the nuns.
