1. Jesus be with mi padre and free him from this people of Egypt, for I tell you they have frightened me by what they have done with these poor nuns. I tried to get the nuns to obey because the scandal was already great. This seemed to be the best solution, especially to the Dominicans. From what I surmise these fathers are helping one another and have united against this reform. I am tired of all their clamoring. To tell the truth the nuns have been suffering for a long time. Nonetheless, if I hadn't told them that in my opinion they would not do harm to their cause by obeying, I don't think they would have obeyed.
2. Since the discalced friars are no longer present, little progress has been made on their cause. In fact, I wrote to Roque and to Padilla that if what concerned the discalced friars were not resolved and the calced friars remained as visitators, the nuns' cause would make no headway. Even if the council did favor the nuns, it would be foolish for me to go there. Yet it would look very bad if I did not go but abandoned them after they suffered so much. In addition, I don't think I can shirk my duty, especially since I don't see things going in the right direction and the Lord must find some way of helping these souls. I pity them so much, for they are in distress as you can see through those notes.
3. For goodness' sake send Padre Germán to them that he might pray for them. He is now really out of prison. As for Fray John, I am very disturbed with the thought that they might find some other fault to accuse him of. God treats his friends terribly. Truly, he does them no wrong since that is the way he treated his Son.
4. Read this letter that a gentleman brought from Ciudad Rodrigo, for he came solely to speak about this nun. He has many things to say about her. If they are true, she will be most suited for us. She is bringing 450 ducats and a good trousseau as well. Alba is asking me for a nun. This aspirant would like to go to Salamanca, but she would go to Alba as well. In Salamanca, though, they are in greater need because of the bad state the house is in. She will be able to go wherever you decide to send her. I promised to beg you to admit her. She seems agreeable to going to either of the two houses.
5. Here in this house the talk is of two aspirants from Burgos with 1500 ducats. They say they are very good and the dowry is needed for some work projects including what needs to be done on the enclosure wall. With another nun, everything can be completed. Will you give permission for this.
6. Look at all the confusion stirred up by a member of the Society over a sister of the prioress of Beas. I asked the prioress of Medina to inquire. She will find out what is being said. They must know much more than we do. You should be careful about what she might do, for I tell you there are persons whose nature doesn't change. Well, even though Anne of Jesus saw her two or three times for a short moment, she must have been told about it. I answered as if I knew everything that I do now. In my hurry I saw that neither she nor her brother spoke of her. The brother belongs to the Society, and it seems good that they help each other.
7. I regret having had to go so long without confessing to you, for here I don't find confessors as I did in Toledo. This is a great trial for me. I wrote this yesterday, and now I am being told of so many things about the injustices being done to the nuns at the Incarnation that I feel great pity for them. I think some of the nuns in this house are afraid of falling into their hands, and I am not surprised by their fear, for they have reason to fear.
8. May God provide a remedy and watch over you. The night is far advanced, and the messenger will be leaving in the morning.
Today is 11 March.
Your paternity's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
