To the most illustrious Señora Doña María de Mendoza, my lady. Valladolid.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your most illustrious ladyship and give you strength to suffer so many trials, for certainly this has been a harsh blow. I have felt great pain over what yours must be. I trust in the favors our Lord grants you that he will not fail to console you in this affliction and remind you during this holy season of the sufferings His Majesty and his glorious Mother underwent. If we felt them as we should, we would suffer all the pains of this life with great ease.
2. I would love to be there in your company and help you by sharing your pain, although I have been doing so here. I had no other consolation than to beg St. Joseph and our Lord to be with you. All of us in our prayers have been careful to make supplications for you and for that holy soul. I hope the Lord has already called her to his side and that he wanted to take her out of the world before she knew more about the things that are in it. Everything comes to an end so quickly that if our minds were awake and enlightened, it would not be possible to feel sorry over those who die knowing God, but rejoice in their good.
3. I also felt sorry for the count, in judging only from what we see, but the judgments of God are great and his secrets we cannot understand. Perhaps his salvation lies in his being a widower. I think His Majesty takes special care over all your concerns, for he is a most trustworthy friend. We can be sure that he has considered what is most suitable for souls; compared to this nothing else merits much of our attention. Eternal good or evil is what matters, and so I beg you for love of our Lord not to be thinking of the reasons you have for being afflicted but in those you have for taking comfort. In doing so you will receive much benefit. Otherwise you will lose, and even do harm to your health, which you are obliged to look after, for we all prize it highly. May God give you many years, as we all beg of him.
4. These sisters and Mother Prioress kiss your hands many times; I kiss those of Señora Doña Beatriz.
Today is Wednesday of Holy Week. I did not write before this, because I did not think you would feel like reading letters.
Your illustrious ladyship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
