1. Jesus be with you, my daughter, and grant you and all your daughters as happy an Easter as I beg him. For me it has been a great comfort to know that you are in good health. My health remains as usual, with my arm in bad shape and my head too; I don't even understand what prayers they are saying. Truly, this must be the best thing for me. It would be a consolation if my head were such that I could write a long letter, and send many greetings for everyone. Do so for me, and especially to Sister San Francisco whose letters are a delight for us. Believe me, during the time she was prioress she grew wings. Oh, Jesus, how alone I feel when I see you all so far away. Please God, we will all be together in eternity. I find comfort in the thought that everything passes quickly.
2. What you say about the fault you find with Fray Bartolomé's sisters amused me. Even though you could finish paying off the house with their dowries, it would not be permissible to accept them. Under no circumstances should you take anyone who does not have good judgment. That would go against the constitutions and bring incurable harm. Thirteen years old is very young -- I'm speaking of the other one; at that age they tend to change their minds a thousand times. You will have to see for yourself what is best. As for me, I believe that I want everything that is good for you.
3. Before I forget, I am not in favor of the sisters writing about prayer, for this has many drawbacks which I would like to tell you about. You should know that even though doing this amounts to nothing but a waste of time, it impedes freedom of soul and allows one to imagine all kinds of things. If I remember, I will mention this to our padre; and if I don't, you tell him. Important graces are never forgotten; and if they are forgotten, there is no reason to mention them. When they see our padre, it will be enough for them to mention what they remember. In my opinion, they are on a safe path, and if something can do them harm, it would be for them to give importance to what they see and hear. If they experience some scruple, they can tell you, for I so esteem you that if they trust you, God will give you the light to guide them. I insist so much on this because I understand the trouble they will run into from thinking about what they should write and from what the devil can put into their heads. If it is something very serious, you could write it down, but without their knowing this. If I had paid attention to the experiences of San Jerónimo, she would never have finished. And if some of them seemed true, I still was silent about them. Believe me, it is better to praise the Lord, who gives these graces, and when they have passed to get beyond them, for it is the soul that will experience the benefit.
4. What you tell me about Elías is good. But since I don't have your erudition, I don't know who the Assyrians are. My best regards to her for I love her very much, also to Beatriz and her mother. It makes me very happy when you tell me about yourself and the good news about everyone. God pardon those friars who harass us so much.
5. And don't believe everything they say down there; up here we are given more hope. And in this we rejoice, although in darkness, as Madre Isabel de San Francisco says. With this painful arm, my heart is very bad on some days. Send me a little orange-flower water, and pack it so that the container doesn't break. That is why I didn't ask you for it sooner. The angel water you sent was so exquisite that using it caused me scruples, so I gave it to the church for the celebration of the feast of the glorious St. Joseph.
6. Give the prior of Las Cuevas my best wishes, for I love this saint very much, and Padre Garciálvarez and my Gabriela -- certainly there is a reason why our madre calls her "her Gabriela" -- whose presence there I could easily envy if it were not for all the love we have for one another in the Lord and if I didn't understand that the affection she has for you and your daughters is so well deserved. And how Madre Isabel de San Francisco does so much to make us aware of this. Even if she had gone to your house for no other reason than to praise you and all your nuns to the skies, her journey there was worthwhile. But wherever you are, mi madre, you will be praised. Blessed be God who gave you so many gifts, which you use so well.
7. I ask mi madre San Francisco for prayers -- I cannot say more -- and for prayers from all the nuns, especially Sister San Jerónimo. Teresa asks for your prayers. Señor Lorenzo Cepeda is well.
8. Please God, mi madre, you will be able to read this, written so poorly and in great haste. What else could be expected?
Today is Friday of the Cross.
Send me only a little orange-flower water, until we see how it arrives.
Your reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus
9. The secretary is Isabel de San Pablo, servant of your reverence and of all in your house. Madre mía, now I remember that I heard it said that in Seville there are some paintings that are large and well done, that Julián Dávila was praising them. Our madre told me to ask you for one of St. Paul. Send me one that is very beautiful. And pardon me, but it must be one that I will enjoy looking at.
