1. Jesus be with your paternity, mi padre. After Father Prior from Mancera left, I spoke to Maestro Daza and Doctor Rueda about the matter concerning the province. I would not want you to do anything that could be considered wrong, for even if such a thing turned out well, it would grieve me more than all the things done to ruin our plans at no fault of ours.
2. Both of them say that it is something difficult to admit if the commission given to you does not make specific mention of your power to do so. Doctor Rueda especially is of this opinion, to which I adhere because I consider him wise in all matters. In short, he is a very learned man. He says that since one is dealing with a matter of jurisdiction it would be difficult to hold an election, for without the intervention of the general or the pope one has no power to do so and the votes would have no force. That is all they would need so as to have recourse to the pope and protest vehemently about passing beyond the boundaries of obedience and naming superiors without power to do so. It sounds bad, and he thinks it would be more difficult to get confirmation from the pope of such elections than it would to get permission to form a separate province. A letter written by the king to his ambassador would suffice for him to gladly grant it. This would be easy to obtain since the pope would be told of how the others are treating the discalced friars. It is probable that if one were to discuss this with the king, he would be happy to do so. That would be a great help to the reform, for the others would have more respect for it and not insist on saying that the reformed houses should be done away with.
3. Perhaps it would be good for you to speak of this with Padre Maestro Chaves and bring him the letter I sent you through Father Prior. He is very discreet and enjoys the favor of the king; perhaps he could obtain what we desire. The friars who are designated to travel to Rome could then bring a letter from the king about this matter, for in no way would I want them to fail to go. As Doctor Rueda says, the direct way to proceed is to address the matter to the pope or the general.
4. I tell you that if Padre Padilla and all of us had thought of seeking the king's help in this matter, everything would have been taken care of by now. And even you could speak to the king and to the archbishop. If the elected provincial needs to be confirmed by the king and enjoy his favor, it's better to seek this favor now. And if you don't obtain it, there would be less of a stir and less damage done than if the refusal came after the election. Our reputation would be stained, and you would lose credibility for having acted without authority and without good judgment.
5. Doctor Rueda says that even if the dominican visitator or another were to do the electing, that would be better than having the discalced friars elect their own superiors. In these matters of jurisdiction you have to insist, and it's important, that the head receive his powers from a legitimate source. In thinking that they will accuse you with good reason I become disheartened. I don't experience this when they accuse you unjustly; rather, I grow wings and take off. And so I couldn't wait to write this so that you will be very careful.
6. Do you know what crossed my mind? Perhaps the gifts I sent to our Father General were used against us (for they were very nice) and given to some cardinals. And the thought comes to me not to send anything until this matter is over. So it would be good, if the occasion presents itself, to give something to the nuncio. I notice, mi padre, that when you are in Madrid you accomplish much in one day. If you speak with this one and that and with the friends you have in the palace and with Padre Fray Antonio, whom you could get to speak with the duchess, much could be done toward getting the king to favor our cause. He wants the reform to continue. And let Padre Mariano speak with him and present our cause to him and beg him and remind him of how long it is now that that little saint Fray John has been prisoner. In their furor over the visitation, they do these foolish things, which they wouldn't be able to do if they had a superior. Well, the king listens to everyone. I don't know why we should neglect telling him about this and asking for his support, Padre Mariano especially.
7. But how I chatter on and what silly things I tell you! And you put up with it all from me. I tell you that I am terribly upset that I do not have the freedom to do myself what I am telling others to do. Now that the king is about to go so far away, I wish something could be done first. May God do it, as he can.
8. We are eagerly awaiting those ladies. The sisters here are determined not to allow your sister to pass by without giving her the habit. You owe them a special debt of gratitude. I have a high regard for this attitude of theirs. They are so many and in such need, but they set nothing above having someone from your family. Well, that Teresita, the things she says and does! I, too, would be delighted because I wouldn't be able to enjoy your sister's company in the place where she is going, and perhaps never because it is a very out-of-the-way place. Nonetheless, it depends on me, and I will oppose them, for she has already been accepted in Valladolid and will be fine there, and to keep her here would be a great disappointment for them, especially Casilda. We will keep Juliana here -- although for now I am not mentioning anything to the nuns about her -- because I think it would be too great a hardship for Señora Doña Juana if she were sent to Seville, and perhaps Juliana herself would regret this when older. Oh, how I am tempted to become disturbed about your sister, the one who is in the boarding school. Through failure to understand, she is refusing help and a life more peaceful than the one she has there.
9. My brother Lorenzo is bringing this letter, for he is going to Madrid and from there, I believe, to Seville. Would you kindly allow him to enter the monastery in Seville to see a little stove the prioress has made for cooking -- for they are raving about it -- and we can not make one like it here if he doesn't see it. And if it is all that I am told it is, it will prove a treasure for both friars and nuns. I am writing to the prioress to allow him to enter for this purpose. But if this doesn't seem to you to be a good enough reason, let me know, for he will be staying in Madrid for a few days. But if you saw what they are writing about it, you would not be surprised that here they want to have one. They say it is better than Soto's little mule, and what more could one say of it. The prioress, I believe, is writing you, and so I have no more to say than ask God to watch over you for me.
10. The prioress in Alba is very sick. Pray for her; despite all they say about her, her loss would be a great one. She is very obedient, and where obedience is present, a simple word of advice is enough to take care of everything. Oh, what the nuns in Malagón are going through without Brianda. But I've laughed at the thought of their desire that she return.
11. Doña Luisa de la Cerda's youngest daughter has died. I'm extremely distressed over the trials God gives this lady. The only daughter she has left is the widow. I think it would be good for you to write and console her. We owe her much.
12. Consider the possibility of your sister remaining here. If you think this would be preferable, I will not interfere, especially if Doña Juana would like to have her close by. Since she already has it in mind to go to Valladolid, I fear that she will come to regret remaining here. She will learn of the conveniences they have there that we don't have here, even if they amount to no more than the garden, for the ground here is wretched.
13. May God watch over you, mi padre, and make you as holy as I beg of him, amen, amen. My arm is getting better.
Today is April 15.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
14. Doña Guiomar is here and feeling better; she longs to see you. She weeps for her Fray John of the Cross as do all the nuns. This has really been a hard thing to take. The Incarnation is getting back to life as usual.
