1. Jesus be with your paternity, mi padre. Oh, how dreadful of you to write such a short letter when you had as good a messenger as Juan. I was delighted to see him and to hear especially about you. I've already answered, in the letter brought you by Father Prior of Mancera, some of the things you asked me about. I feel mortified that you would pay any attention to me. Do what seems best to you; that would be the better course to follow.
2. I am so fearful after seeing that from everything good the devil draws out evil. Until the hour of those fathers passes, I would not want there to be any occasion for more calumnies and abuse. As I have said at other times, they come out on top in everything. Thus, I won't be surprised by anything they do. It doesn't seem to them they are doing anything against God, for they have the superiors on their side. They don't care about the king, for they see that he remains silent despite all they do. And if they should dare do something against you, the results would be terrible. Apart from the great pain and affliction this would cause everyone, they would feel discouraged and lost. God deliver us, and I think he will; but he wants us to do what we can to help ourselves. This along with the other things I wrote you compels me not to beg you to come here no matter how much I desire this.
3. The prioress of Alba is very sick. It is there that you are most needed. I wish you could go there with more calm than is now possible, and I would not want you to leave Madrid until things become more stable, and Peralta goes away. I know what they did when the king sent for Padre Mariano, even though they are less bold in Madrid than here. Yet, it is hard for me not to be able to give joy to a mother, and such a mother. So I don't know what to tell myself except that one can no longer live in this world.
4. You ask if it would not be better for you to go by another way, since if you come here you will be going out of your way. I tell you I long to see those ladies, but if you have to accompany them, you can remain more hidden if you go the other way, for no monasteries of those blessed creatures exist along that route. If such were not the case, I would find it hard if to avoid going eight leagues out of your way you failed to grant me this favor and rest here some days, and provide us with this joy that all the sisters hope for, as I wrote to you through my brother who left today for Madrid.
5. Thirdly, you tell me that Señora Doña Juana is coming with her daughter. It seems to me this is a demanding trip (eighty leagues) that she is now planning, a trip she could avoid and thus not risk her health which we so prize. I have made that trip and did so surrounded with much comfort and diversion, for I traveled with Señora María de Mendoza; still, it seemed long.
6. You should know that I am determined not to let your mother go beyond Avila. It is really not necessary because Señora Doña María has her brother and another woman accompanying her. Everything has been taken care of there, and it would be a big mistake for her to so tire herself out now that she has already seen her daughter. It would be better to wait until the time for the taking of the veil when, God willing, the situation will not be so dangerous and you could accompany her more easily than now. Her health is so important to us that otherwise I would not dare give such advice. At least, I will make every effort to keep her from continuing on her journey after she arrives here. The journey this far, if the weather is good, is not long. And now I recall that if she comes by carriage, it is better to come this way, for there are no mountain passes as there are along the other road.
7. I have been wondering, if Señora Doña Juana does not come and only Señor Tomás de Gracián accompanies his sister, if it would not be good for Padre Fray Antonio to travel with them, for he is well now. You will say that he too is a discalced friar. But his white hair will be a safeguard for him against all gossip. If you are not involved, no one will pay any attention, for everyone is now concentrating on you. I will be happy to see him again, now resurrected. This is the thought that entered my mind. If it isn't practical, consider it foolishness, for I know no more than what I have said.
8. I tell you that I would be overjoyed to see Doña Juana, but I think we are taking a risk, especially if she wants to travel any further than here. God deliver me from myself, for I pay so little attention to my rest. May it please the Lord to give my soul rest in a leisurely visit with you.
9. In the letter sent you through my brother, I wrote of how difficult it seems to Doctor Rueda and Maestro Daza that you elect prioresses without orders from the pope or the general, since it is a matter of their jurisdiction. Since I wrote at length about this, I'll say nothing but that you consider it, for the love of the Lord. You have a great deal of work and must always be so careful about everything. God will give us better times. For now, mi padre, we must take the path along which God may protect you. The prioress and subprioress sent you letters through my brother. If you need anything from the judge Covarrubias, you must tell my brother for they are good friends.
The Lord be with you and keep you many years for me and with much holiness.
Today is April 17.
Your paternity's unworthy daughter.
Teresa of Jesus
10. You should know, mi padre, that I am very sorry that I didn't know that Señora Doña Juana was going to come so soon. We've got the choir all exposed and the turmoil of workmen coming and going and the grilles removed. I was very happy at the thought of being able to have her here: what a life! It became impossible to stay in the choir because of either the cold or the heat. That will now be taken care of. See if it is possible to authorize Doña María to enter inside when here, for although everything is a mess, it will help her appreciate the house in Valladolid.
