1. Jesus be with your honor. I would be foolish to deprive you of the joy of reading a letter from me by not spending some time to write you when so good a messenger is available. Blessed be the Lord who has arranged things so well. May it please His Majesty to do the same in everything else.
2. Don't you see how, even though you didn't want it, circumstances made it necessary for my brother to come here? And it may be that he will have to come again to get the money, although there may be someone through whom he can send it. He will bring you news about your son. Everything that could bring one joy is going well now; may the same be true regarding the soul's progress. Go to confession in preparation for Christmas and pray for me.
3. Don't you see that however much I try, His Majesty doesn't want me to be poor? I tell you, indeed, that in a certain sense this gives me great displeasure, but it removes the scruples I undergo when I have to spend something. I am thinking now of some little things I got for you, of what I paid and what was left and the greater amount I spent on the needs of the order, and, so as not to go around with these scruples, to keep account of what I have to spend otherwise. For if I do have money, I cannot keep anything when I see the great need at the Incarnation. And no matter how much I try, I cannot get fifty ducats for what I claim is necessary, not for getting what I want but for what pertains to the greater service of God. That is the truth. May His Majesty guide us and make you holy and give you a happy Christmas.
4. I don't like these plans of which my brother speaks. It would involve going outside your own house and spending more than he would make. And you would be alone, and we would all be anxious. Let us wait now to see what the Lord does. Try to please the Lord, for he will take care of your affairs. And don't forget that all things come to an end. Don't fear that your children will be left in want if you seek to please His Majesty. My regards to Beatriz. May he watch over you all. Amen.
5. One thing I ask you out of charity is that you do not love me for the sake of what you can gain in the world but because I pray for you. When it comes to anything else, there's nothing I can do -- regardless of what Señor Godínez says -- and it distresses me. I follow the one who governs my soul, and not whatever happens to enter the head of this one or another. I say this so that you may respond when something is said to you. You should understand that if we consider how the world is now and the state the Lord has placed me in, the less you think I do for you the better it is for me; and this is fitting for the service of the Lord. Certainly, even if I should do nothing, it would be enough for someone to imagine the least little thing so as to say about me what I hear said about others. So you have to be careful in regard to the little thing you mentioned to me.
6. Believe me that I truly love you and that sometimes I put together some trifle for a moment in which it will bring you pleasure. But explain when someone mentions it to you that I must spend what I have at my disposal for the order, for it belongs to the order. And how do others have a say in this matter? Realize that someone as exposed to the world as I am has to be careful even in the way she practices virtue. You'd be unable to believe the trouble I have. But, then, I do things so as to serve God. His Majesty will watch over you and your affairs for me.
7. May God keep you; I've gone on at length and the bell for Matins has rung. I assure you that when I see a postulant bringing with her something of value, I think of you and Beatriz, but I would never take anything, not even by paying for it with my money.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
