1. Jesus be with your paternity, mi padre -- and my superior, as you say, which delighted me and gave me a good laugh. Every time I think of this I am amused at how sincerely you seem to tell me not to judge my superior.
2. Oh, mi padre, what little need there was for you to swear -- neither as a saint nor much less like a teamster -- for I am fully persuaded. God who has given you the zeal and desire for the good of souls would not take it away when you deal with the good of your subjects. Now to set this aside, I only want to remind you that you gave me permission to judge you and think whatever I want about you.
3. Doña Juana arrived late yesterday, almost at nightfall, which was April 25, and she felt well, glory to God. I greatly enjoyed being with her, for every day I love her more, and find her better and wiser. As for our nun, she is so happy that her joy can not be put into words. After she entered, it seemed she had been here all her life. I hope in God she will become a great nun. She has a fine intelligence and is very capable.
4. I would so much like Doña Juana not to continue on, but you have inspired this angel with so much love for Valladolid that no pleas were sufficient to keep her here.
5. Oh, and Teresa, what she didn't say and do! But Doña María took it well, as a prudent person, saying that she would do whatever I wanted, but it was clear that she didn't want to stay.
6. I spoke to her privately about this house and told her many things about it and how it came into being almost miraculously and other things. She answered that it didn't matter to her whether she was here or there. We thought we had made progress with her, but I then saw her become sad. Well, she spoke privately with Doña Juana and asked her not to fail to bring her to Valladolid and that she not let this desire of hers be known.
7. It seemed to Doña Juana and me that there was nothing else we could do, for it could become a source of discontent for her to receive the habit here and afterward go there. Doña María told me clearly that she would find staying here painful, that she wouldn't be able to bear leaving the monastery she had entered. And so I believe Doña Juana will leave tomorrow afternoon with her daughter. I would very much have liked her to stay at least until Monday. But since I see the expense that would involve, I did not insist very much.
8. She is staying at my brother's house, and Aranda is taking good care of her. May God go with her, for I am concerned, although she arrived in good shape after the most difficult part of the journey. Please God the rest of the trip will not do her any harm, for she is healthy and has a strong constitution. I embraced her at the door -- for I am very fond of her -- when Señora Doña María entered. May God bring her back home safely, for she is precious.
