1. Jesus be with your paternity. After having written the letter enclosed with this one, I received today, the feast of the Ascension, your letters that came by way of Toledo. They caused me much distress. I tell you, mi padre, that what you mention is a reckless thing. Tear this up right after you read it.
2. You can well imagine the consequences with all his complaining about me of which I am getting mighty tired. Although I love him much, very much so, and he is a holy man, I cannot fail to observe that God has not given him a talent for discernment. Don't you see how much trust he placed in the more unruly nuns. And without further information he wants to do and undo. I am well aware that she doesn't have what it takes to govern. But her defects are not something that brings dishonor to the order, for it's an in-house affair. I had earlier written them that you would go there and resolve matters, and that they should speak about their temptations with their confessor and not with her.
3. To want Isabel de Jesús to rule over them and be their subprioress is sheer nonsense. During the few days that they did have her while Brianda was prioress there, these very same nuns were ever telling stories about her and laughing over it all. They will never respect her. She is good, but not suited for that charge. To take away the office from Ana de la Madre de Dios for only a couple of days is foolish and judging by his hurry to have her, Brianda will be back there shortly. It would be hard for me to see her brought back, for with the exception of her being brought there for the purpose of moving on as soon as possible to a new foundation, I greatly fear her being in that place because of the one who is there.
4. That she does nothing for the discalced friars only means that she is following your orders. As for the rest of the gossip, I don't think it has merit. Neither do I regret the way she behaves toward me, for I know her and she is by no means reserved but very straightforward. They must be telling him the opposite of what she says. You already know that Brianda wrote asking me to give her orders not to give anything to any discalced friar. Another nun wrote that they had spent more on the discalced friars than on all their sick nuns, and many of them were sick that year. It seems to me, mi padre, that even if St. Clare went there, they would find much to complain about because of the one who is there and their own stubbornness.
5. As for her not caring for the sick, that is a calumny, for her charity is great. I was very embarrassed, mi padre, by her predecessor, for all those things matter little as long as the honor of the house is not involved, especially in Malagón where everybody is passing through. What they are saying about honor is a pretext, for she went to Toledo for her health on the advice of her doctors. I truly don't know what you can do about this.
6. It pleases me to observe how Padre Fray Antonio took care to forbid any mention of Brianda, which was the best thing he could do. You should examine the situation carefully, for goodness' sake. The best thing to do would be to bring in someone like Isabel de Santo Domingo along with a good subprioress and remove some of those who are there. You need to write briefly to Padre Fray Antonio not to make any changes until you have carefully considered everything. I will write to him that I cannot do anything until I see what orders you give, and I will disillusion him about certain things.
7. In regard to the house, I felt sorry, for it is a pity that there has been no one to lament this. They could have built some part by now, and I just wish they would finish two suites of rooms and the enclosure wall. That would prevent all from being lost if the entire work can't be finished now. For they will be better off there, however little there is, than where they are now. Please write to them about this.
8. I don't know how, mi padre, you assigned him to a task in Malagón without first briefing him thoroughly. I admit I feel like a dunce; nonetheless, I think that to remove and replace the superior there and without rhyme or reason brings great discredit to the house. If I thought that N could amend her ways, it would be better for her to resume her office as prioress and finish out her term. But I have lost hope in her ever making amends. And Padre Fray Bartolomé de Jesús, and Fray Francisco de la Concepción, and Antonio Ruiz have so insisted that she not return there that I think it would be rash not to pay heed to them. Please look into this and do as the Lord enlightens you. That is what will be the best thing to do. I will beg him to give you light. But it's most necessary that you warn this father at once and see that Padre Fray Antonio does not make a martyr of that saint, for she certainly is one.
May God be with you always.
Your paternity's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
9. I don't think it would be a mortification for Isabel de Santo Domingo to go there. She would bring order back into the house, and Brianda could go to Segovia, or María de San Jerónimo. May God take care of this. As for Isabel de Santo Domingo's health, that region is hot, and since she is so esteemed, the sisters will not dare say anything about her. I reopened this letter to cross out what I said about Mariano lest the letter get lost. I'm very much tried by him.
