1. Jesus be with your paternity. I had already written this enclosed letter and wanted to send it when the discalced brothers arrived and gave me yours. I tell you your letters restored my health. For yesterday evening when I received letters from Malagón I so tired myself out in reading and answering them that my bad cold got much worse. And now yours brought me such delight that I feel much better. May God be blessed who gives you the health to serve him so well and benefit so many souls. This is a tremendous consolation to me. Nonetheless, I would like to see you come here, for since there has been no rainfall in that region, it must certainly be very unhealthy. I don't know what you can do down there that you cannot do here. But the Lord who foresees everything undoubtedly must have waited for this opportunity to benefit those souls. For your presence could not have failed but to bear much fruit.
2. I forgot to mention in the enclosed letter how displeased I was to learn that Fray Hernando Medina gave the habit to our nun. I don't know what obsesses that little prioress that she thinks she has to satisfy those friars. From the enclosed letter by Fray Angel you will see how they already knew that you were to come along with your sister. I have been happy that you didn't do so. Now is a much more favorable time to come. I have already written to Ardapilla asking him to urge you to come. In adding some foolish things, I said that you are obliged to come even if you don't want to, that there is no alternative.
3. I have already thought of how my daughter María de San José could help me get some rest. With her handwriting, ability, and joy, she would be a relief for me. God will be able to bring this about after she makes profession, even though it may not be so easy for young women to fare well with old women. I am even amazed that you do not get tired with me. But God provides for this so that I may bear with the life he gives me, one with so little health and satisfaction, save in this. I also believe that those who care for God's affairs and truly love him cannot but enjoy the company of anyone who desires to serve him.
4. It would distress me if Ardapilla were to come with his refrain about the Incarnation. I have written to ask you if he has the authority to give me the order to return there, and you do not answer. I want you to know that I will do what I can to refuse, for without the confessors there, and also without a change of obedience, it would be foolish for me to return. But if he obliges me under pain of sin to go, you can see what my situation would be.
5. For goodness' sake write to me clearly what I must and can do, for these are not things to write about so obscurely. And always pray for me very much for I am now very old and tired, but not in my desires. I will give the sisters your regards. I would like you to come with the prior of Mancera. I tell you, it seems to me that from now on you are wasting your time down there, for this is no longer the season for sermons.
6. What a stir those nuns are causing over a hundred reales. See if I am not right by saying that in these visitations it is necessary to proceed with great care in everything. It is very important that when another superior comes he find nothing to complain about. I felt disgusted, for the one who gave the reales, who was overseeing everything, could well have avoided that so much importance be attached to this. As for Fray Antonio, it doesn't matter, but when he reproaches me for even some small thing that involves my Paul, I cannot bear it. As for myself, I don't mind.
7. God watch over you, mi padre, for you do me a great favor in getting so fat, as those fathers tell me, despite all your work.
May he be always blessed. Doña Guiomar will be delighted with your letter. She is doing well.
Today is May 14, and I am your paternity's true daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
8. I hope that all of this I have now written will not do me as much harm as did the letter I wrote to Malagón, but rather good. With regard to founding a monastery in Villanueva, it would in no way be fitting if the Franciscans have become involved. For them it is an appropriate site and they will know how to help the sisters beg. You are right; begging is a terrible thing in these little towns. The foundation in Madrid is the one that is important, and there is a good basis for our being able to make it at once. And believe in the importance of this, and also of giving something to Huerta. We will give you orders about this when you come.
