1. Jesus be with your paternity. The padre who will take this letter is about to leave, and so I can't be long. I very much regret that no one told me last evening that he was departing today. I am better and so is the arm.
2. As for what you had to endure because of the cat, I am amazed that he spoke so unpleasantly of Esperanza. God forgive him. If he were as bad as he says, they certainly wouldn't have tried so hard not to lose him. I am glad you didn't send the letter to Seville. I think it's better to be completely humble in dealing with them, for we truly owe them much, and much is due to many among them. Judging from what I have seen, I don't think this father is very prudent, so I wouldn't want you to prolong any of your dealings with him.
3. They have also written me from Toledo where there are many complaints about me. The truth is that I did everything I could, and even more than I should have. And so I have concluded that the reason for the complaining about you and me is our great care not to cause them any displeasure. And I believe that if we had looked only at God and done for his service alone what so good a desire required things would now be more peaceful and everyone happier, for the Lord himself would have smoothed everything over. But when we proceed with human respect, the goal is never reached; in fact the opposite happens, as it now appears. It's as though what he wanted to do was heresy! As I told them, they are sorry that it has become known. Certainly, mi padre, they, and we too, have had many earthly concerns in this whole affair. Nonetheless, I am happy that things turned out this way. I would want our Lord to be satisfied.
4. I have already written you about how much the fathers of the Society here are insisting that Padre Mariano come to look at a fountain. They have been pressing him to come for a long time. Now he has written that he will come during the course of this month. I beg you to write and tell him not to fail to keep his promise no matter what, and don't forget.
5. I am shocked by this imprisonment of Fray John of the Cross and the slow pace of all our negotiations. May God provide a remedy. From Toledo they write me that Tostado has at last gone, although I don't believe it. They say he is leaving Fray Angel in his place.
6. I don't know what to think about your not coming here. I now see that you are right. But time is passing without anyone being sent to Rome. And we are all lost with hopes that will go on a thousand years. I don't understand what's going on or why Nicolao doesn't go, for this would not impede the other action. Now I see that you are more careful than anyone, but fulfilling one's obligations toward the general can in no way cause harm, and now is a good time. And if this is not done, I don't think all the rest will be of any lasting help. Diligent efforts are never wrong just because they are many.
7. It is an excellent idea to name this college St. Joseph. God reward you. This project will be great for the order. With regard to Toledo, things are going very well. The nun is obstinate, and the prioress is foolish in asking you if you want to initiate a lawsuit since the house and a large sum of money are involved. Doña Guiomar was delighted with your letter and I was too. I am not surprised.
8. That padre senses the difference that must be noted in Guadalajara between himself and Paul. The difference between the two persons is very great and the feelings of human nature are strong. I deeply wish you would be strong by treating him graciously, for I find him somewhat high-spirited in his speech. To put up with the weaknesses of each one is very important. May God give us the strength necessary to please him, amen.
9. I don't know how to answer you in regard to those nuns. Four hundred ducats for twenty! I wouldn't even want six hundred. It's necessary to await the decision of Doña María de Mendoza, who will not fail to do everything well. I deeply regret having to see such things in matters of income.
10. Antonia told us here about the many ordinances you had made so that we were all scandalized, so I sent to ask you about this. Believe me, mi padre, that these houses are doing well, and there is no need to burden them with more observances, for they would find it hard to take on any additional obligations. And don't forget this, but always insist that they keep the constitutions and no more, for they will be doing a lot if they keep them well. In matters concerning the nuns you can trust me, for from what is happening here I see what is going on there. However small the ordinance may be, it becomes burdensome, as it would first of all for me, unless you were to ordain it in the name of God.
May he preserve you for many years.
Today is May 22.
Your paternity's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
