1. Jesus. The Holy Spirit be with you, my daughter. I have received your two letters, the one by way of Madrid, the other brought this week by the muleteer who lives here and who is so slow that I get annoyed. All that you sent me is very good and arrived in excellent condition, including the water. It's excellent, but now there's no need for more; this is enough. I was pleased with the little jars you sent; now they suffice. Since I am better, I don't need to be pampered; some day I am going to have to be mortified.
2. The arm is getting better, although not so that I can dress myself. They say that with the warmer weather it will soon be all right. The box of gifts was well packed, and so too was all the rest. Don't think that I will eat all those preserves. In fact, I don't care for them, but never in my life will I stop wanting to give. Since there is no lack of business matters to be carried out, and the charity of others to lend us help is not as openly ardent as in mi padre, the prior of Las Cuevas, or in Padre Garciálvarez, everything is useful.
3. The design for the little stove was so clear that I don't think a mistake can be made. It is now being manufactured. All the nuns are amazed at your talent and they thank you very much, very much indeed, and I do too. Your love for me is obvious in the way you please me in everything. I really believe this, but I tell you that you even owe me more love, for I am astonished at how much I love you. Don't think that anyone surpasses you in this respect, for not everyone is to my liking the way you are. The unfortunate thing is that there is little I can do for you, since I am so wretched, but I take great care to recommend you to God.
4. I was disturbed by this heart trouble that you say you have, for it is very painful; and I am not surprised, with all the terrible trials you have suffered and your being very much alone. Even though the Lord has favored us by giving you the virtue and courage necessary to bear them, the body suffers from it. Be glad about one thing: your soul is now much more advanced -- and believe me I don't say this just to console you, but because I know it to be so -- and this, my daughter, never happens without great cost. The trial you are now going through is terribly distressing to me, for it is something disquieting for all the nuns. It's about time for some improvement. I hope in our Lord that she will be cured, for many afflicted with this illness get better, and it is very important that one allow oneself to be cured. God will provide, for perhaps he wants to give you this cross for a short while and will draw from it much good. I earnestly beg this of him.
5. Take note now of what I am going to say. Try to see her as little as possible, for with your kind of heart trouble it would be so harmful for you that you could end up in bad condition -- and note that this is an order. Choose two of the more courageous nuns to attend to her, and the rest should hardly ever see her. They should go about joyfully and be no more disturbed than they would if caring for a sick nun. And in a way they should feel less pity for her, since those who are in this state are less sensitive to suffering than those enduring other illnesses.
6. These days we are reading here of a monastery of our order where St. Euphrasia was a nun and in it was someone like this sister, and she was submissive only to this saint who in the end cured her. Perhaps there might be someone there whom she would fear. If in these monasteries there were no trials arising from poor health, we would have heaven on earth and no way to gain merit. Perhaps a thrashing will get her to stop screaming. This wouldn't do her any harm. You do well to keep her in a safe place. I have wondered if she isn't too sanguine, for I believe she was suffering from back pains. May God cure her.
7. Know that even though these are painful things to have to bear, they are nothing in comparison with the suffering I would go through if I observed there imperfections or restless souls, and since that is not the case, I don't get too disturbed over bodily illnesses. You already know that if you want to rejoice in the Crucified One you have to suffer the cross. It's not necessary that you ask for this -- even though Padre Fray Gregorio thinks it fitting -- because His Majesty leads those whom he loves along the same path as he did his Son.
8. The other day I wrote to Father Prior of Las Cuevas. Give him my best regards, and read this that I am writing to Padre Garciálvarez, and if you think it's all right give it to him. The condition of my head -- still filled with noises, although a little better -- keeps me from always writing to them, for I love them very much. Continue remembering me to them.
9. I was delighted that our padre gave orders that the two nuns who are so deep into prayer eat meat. You ought to know, my daughter, that it occurred to me that if I had them near they wouldn't cause so much commotion. The fact that the graces received by them are so plentiful makes me wary. Even though some favors may be true, I think the proper thing to do is pay little attention to them, and neither should you nor our padre give them much importance; rather, make little of them. And even when they are true, nothing is lost by so behaving. When I say "make little of them" I mean tell the two nuns that God leads some souls in one way and others in another and that this is not the path that leads to the greatest holiness, and that is the truth.
10. I was happy with what Acosta said and that he has such a good opinion of her. I wouldn't want him to speak much with her so that he not lose it if something does not come about, as happened to me in her regard. I do not say that she lost merit in my eyes, for I know well that even though the grace is often from God, sometimes her experience may be the fruit of her own imagination. I have forgotten when that which the other nun predicted is to come about. Let me know whether it turns out to be true or false, for with this carrier the letters are safe. Now it occurs to me that it would not be good for me to respond to Garciálvarez until you let me know whether he knows anything about these matters so that I might write him about them, but give him my best regards and tell him that I was happy to receive his letter and that I will answer him.
11. As for those two nuns who want to enter, be very careful about what you do. It's good that Padre Nicolao is satisfied with them. Our padre, please God, will be down there in September, and perhaps before since he has already received his orders -- as you will surely know, being there; do whatever he tells you. I truly regret having to see him among those people. How necessary prayer is. All the sisters send their warm regards.
12. Oh, Teresa, how she jumped up and down at receiving what you sent her! It's extraordinary, the love she has for you. I believe she would leave her own father to follow you. The older she gets the more she grows in virtue, and she is a very discreet little one. She now receives communion, and with no little devotion. But my head is getting tired, so I'll say nothing more other than may God watch over you, as I beg of him.
13. My best regards to all the nuns and to the Portuguese sister and her mother. Try to avoid stress and tell me how you are doing with your heart trouble. The orange-flower oil is very good. For several days my heart has been better, for after all the Lord does not want to give so many ills all at once.
Today is 4 June.
14. Look at what I beg of you in the enclosed note, or better, order you to do for the love of the Lord. You must act with great attentiveness, for it is something I was entrusted with by a person to whom I am very much obliged. I told him that if you do not manage to carry out the task, no other person will, and that I consider you skillful and lucky in carrying through on what you undertake. Set about this task with the greatest care, and you will make me very happy. Perhaps Father Prior of Las Cuevas will be able to do something, although the one whom I trust most is Padre Garciálvarez. It seems difficult, but when God wills a thing all becomes easy. This would be a wonderful consolation for me; and I even believe it would be of great service to our Lord since it is for the benefit of souls and will bring harm to no one.
15. What you need to get is a whole year of sermons preached by Padre Salucio of the order of St. Dominic, the best that can be had. And if you can't get so many, get as many as possible, provided they are very good. A year of sermons includes those for Lent, Advent, feasts of our Lord and our Lady, the saints for the year, and Sundays from Epiphany to Advent, and Pentecost to Advent.
16. I was asked to keep this mission a secret, so I wouldn't like you to speak about it save to those who can be of help to you. Please God you will have good luck in this, and if you send the sermons to me, do so with this man and pay a good portage, and always address your letters to St. Joseph's while I am here, which is better than addressing them to my brother, even though they be for him; this is the safest thing to do in case he is away. Well, since you can't send all the sermons, send as many as you can. The good things that Padre Garciálvarez and Padre Fray Gregorio say about you and your daughters is a great consolation for me -- as though being your confessors they could say otherwise! Please God what they say is true.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
