1. Jesus be with your honor. It has been a long while since I have been mortified as much as I was today with your letter. For I am not so humble as to want to be considered so proud, neither should you want to show your humility at such a cost to me. I have never desired so eagerly to tear up a letter from you. I tell you that you know well how to mortify me and make me understand what I am, for it seems to you that I think that by myself I am able to teach. God deliver me! I wouldn't even want to think of such a thing. But I realize the fault is mine, while not knowing whether the greater fault may be my desire to see you in good health. My foolish remarks could arise from this weakness and the love I have for you, a love that makes me speak freely, without reflecting on my words, so much so that I too felt scruples afterward about some of the things I spoke of with you. Were it not for feeling scruples about being disobedient, I would not respond to your request, for I feel very disinclined to do this. May God accept what I say, amen.
2. One of my great errors is to judge these matters of prayer from my own experience, and so you don't have to pay any attention to what I say. God will give you other talents than what he gives to a poor little woman like me. Although the Lord has given me the grace of experiencing him actually present, I find that I am loaded down with things needing my direct attention -- and neither persecutions nor trials would be as much an impediment. If these things are such that I can do them quickly, it very often happens that I don't get to bed until 1 or 2 AM, or even later. But afterward the soul is not obliged to attend to any other cares but only to the One whose presence it enjoys. This has done serious harm to my health, and so it must be a temptation, although it seems to me the soul remains freer, as when one has a very important and necessary business matter and finishes up with other things quickly so that they will in no way hinder what one understands to be the more important thing. And so I am most happy to leave all that I can for the sisters to do, even if it could be done better by me. But since that is not my goal, His Majesty makes up for it. I find myself notably more advanced in the interior life the more I try to withdraw from things. Even though I see this clearly, I often neglect to do it, and I certainly feel the harm and see that I could do more and be more diligent in this regard and find myself improved.
3. With this I am not speaking of serious things that one cannot avoid, and my error must also consist in this, for your duties are serious and it would be bad for you to leave them for someone else to do; of this I am convinced, although when I see you sick, I wish you had less work. Indeed it makes me praise our Lord to observe how diligently you attend to the affairs of your house. I am not so foolish as to fail to recognize God's great favor toward you in giving you this talent and the great merit you gain. It makes me very envious, for I wish my superior were like you. Now that God has given you to me as my superior, I would like you to take as much interest in my soul as you do in the spring, something that really amused me. But it is something so necessary for the monastery, that everything you do in that regard is worth it.
4. Nothing more remains to be said. Indeed, I speak to you in complete truthfulness as I do with God, and I understand that all one does to carry out well the office of superior is so pleasing to God that after a short time he gives the person so occupied as much as he gives to another after a long time. And I know this also through experience, as I mentioned before. But I always see you so busy that I suddenly got the idea to speak to you as I did. The more I think of it, the more I see, as I told you, how there is a difference between you and me. I will try to correct myself so as not to speak on impulse, for this costs me so dearly. As soon as I see you in good health, my temptation will cease. May God bring this about, as he can and as I desire.
Your honor's subject,
Teresa of Jesus
