1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit always be with your honor, amen. I have written you letters by four different avenues, and in three of them I enclosed a letter for Señor Jerónimo de Cepeda. Because at least one of them will surely arrive, I'll not respond now to everything you have told me, nor will I say more about the good resolve our Lord has placed in your soul, about which I have praised His Majesty. It seems to me to be a sound decision. Indeed, the motives you mentioned made me think more or less of others there might be, and I hope in the Lord that this will all be for his greater service. In all of our monasteries we are praying especially and unceasingly that since your intention is to serve our Lord, His Majesty will bring you safely to us and guide you toward what will be most beneficial for your soul and for your children.
2. I have written earlier that already six convents have been founded, and two houses also of discalced friars of our order. I consider the latter to be a great favor from the Lord, for they are making splendid progress in the way of perfection. As for the communities of nuns, they all resemble St. Joseph's in Avila, for they all seem to be one. And it heartens me to see how our Lord is so truly praised and with such purity of soul.
3. At present I am in Toledo. It will be a year on the vigil of our Lady's feast in March that I have been here, although from here I made a trip to Ruy Gómez's villa; he is the prince of Eboli. A monastery for friars and one for nuns was founded there, and they are doing very well. I returned here to finish the work of getting everything in order for this house, which will be a very important monastery. My health has been much better this winter. The climate here is wonderful. If there were no other disadvantages -- you would not find it a good place for the education of your children -- you could settle here; at least I sometimes find myself wishing this because of the good climate. But there are places in the region surrounding Avila where you could reside during the winter months. This is what some do. As for my brother Jerónimo de Cepeda, I think, instead, that when God brings him back, he will enjoy better health if he settles here. His Majesty's will is done in all things, for I don't think I have had such good health in forty years, and I am keeping the observance with everyone else, which includes not eating meat except in cases of great necessity.
4. A year ago I had the quartan fevers, but they have left me feeling better. I was engaged in making the foundation in Valladolid, and Señora Doña María de Mendoza, the widow of secretary Cobos, smothered me there with amenities. So when the Lord sees that it is necessary for our good, he gives health; when it is not, sickness. May he be blessed for everything. I was distressed that the illness you had was in your eyes, which is a painful thing. Glory to God that there has been so much improvement.
5. Juan de Ovalle has already written you about his trip to Seville. A friend of mine gave him such good instructions that on the very day he arrived he withdrew the silver. He brought it here where they will give him the money at the end of this month of January. The account of the duties that had to be paid was carried out in my presence; I will enclose it here. I did no small thing in managing these affairs. I have become so adept at bargaining and managing business affairs for these houses of God and of the order that I am abreast of everything. Since I consider your business affairs to be those of our Lord, I rejoice in knowing how to handle them.
6. Before I forget, after I wrote to you, Cueto's son died, who was still very young. There is no trusting in this life; so I am consoled every time I think of how well you understand this.
7. When finishing here I would like to return to Avila, for I am still prioress there and don't want to anger the bishop, for I owe him a great deal as does the whole order. I don't know what the Lord will do with me; I may have to go to Salamanca where they are giving me a house. Although I am tired, the good these houses bring about in the towns where they are located makes me, in conscience, want to do all that I can. May the Lord so help with his grace that I will be given encouragement.
8. In my previous letters I forgot to tell you about the good facilities Avila has for the education of children. The Jesuits have a school where they teach grammar and hear the confessions of the students once a week and make their students so virtuous that it is something to praise God for. The students also learn philosophy and afterward for their theology go to Santo Tomás. There is no reason to go elsewhere for studies and training in virtue, and the whole city is so Christian that it is an edification to outsiders: much prayer, many confessions, and a life of great perfection among the laity.
9. The good Francisco de Salcedo is there. You did me a great favor in sending such a nice gift to Cepeda. That saint never stops expressing his gratitude to you, and I don't think I'm exaggerating by calling him a saint. The elderly Pedro del Peso died about a year ago -- he was well advanced in years. Ana de Cepeda greatly appreciated the alms you sent her. With it she will indeed be rich, for other people help her since she is so good. She will not be lacking a place to stay, but she has such strange traits that she is not suited for community. God leads her by that path. I have never dared to take her into one of these houses, and not because of any lack of virtue in her, but because I see that she lives the life that best suits her. Nor will she stay with Señora Doña María or anyone else, and this is good considering her goals. She seems to live like a hermit, and with that goodness and dedication to much penance that she has always shown.
10. The son of Señora Doña María, my sister, and of Martín de Guzmán has made his profession and is advancing in holiness. And the daughter Doña Beatriz has died, as I have already written to you. Doña Magdalena, who was the youngest, lives in a monastery as a secular. I would love to see God call her to be a nun. She is very pretty. I haven't seen her for many years. Now they are speaking about a marriage for her with a certain widower who has a primogeniture. I don't know how things will turn out.
11. I have already written to your honor about how your assistance to my sister[16] arrived just in time. For I have been frightened by the trials of poverty that the Lord has given her, and she has born it so well that he now wants to give her relief. I have no needs but a surplus of everything, and so what you sent me in alms I will share with my sister, and the rest will go for good works according to your intentions. Because of some scruples that I had, your help came just at the right time, for these foundations make demands on me. However careful I am about using everything for them, I could give less away, such as in courtesy offerings to the learned men whom I must consult about my soul. In sum, the matter concerns trifles, but I was very relieved not to have to appeal to others. They would not fail to help me, but it pleases me to be free in dealing with these gentlemen so as to be able to tell them my opinion. And the world is so selfish that I, in a way, have a horror of possessing anything. So, I will not keep for myself anything of what you sent, but I will keep my freedom by giving some of it to the order. I have all the permissions I need from the general and provincial for receiving nuns, transferring them, and helping one house with the resources of another.
12. They are so blind in trusting me that I don't know how this trust could have come about, and there are people who will go so far as to lend me one or two thousand ducats. So, just at a time when I have come to abhor money and business affairs, the Lord desires that I deal with nothing else, which is no small cross. May it please His Majesty that I serve him in this manner, for all things will pass away.
13. Indeed, I think it will be a relief for me to have you here; since very few things of the earth provide me with it, perhaps our Lord wants me to have this consolation and that we both work together for his honor and glory and bring some profit to souls. For what greatly grieves me is to see so many souls lost, and I am very anxious about those Indians. May the Lord give them light. There is so much misery here and over there that, since I travel in many regions and speak to many persons, I don't know what to say except that we are worse than animals; we do not understand the great dignity of our soul and we undervalue it with things as cheap as those of earth. May the Lord give us light.
14. You can speak with Padre García de Toledo, whom I miss very much in my business affairs; he is the nephew of the viceroy. If you should need anything from the viceroy, know that he is a strong Christian, and it was a great stroke of fortune that he wanted to go over there. I put letters for him in the previous packages I sent. I also enclosed in each some relics for you for your journey. I strongly hope they will get there.
15. I hadn't thought of going on at such length. I want you to know of the favor God bestowed on Señora Doña Juana in granting her such a death. Here we have recommended her to the Lord and offered prayers for her soul in all of our monasteries. I hope in the Lord that she has no need of more. You should try very hard to put aside this grieving. Remember, it is those who do not recall there is an everlasting life that feel such pain when someone departs from the miseries of this life.
16. Best regards to my brother Jerónimo de Cepeda; this letter is for him too. You made me very happy in telling me that you have given orders so that he can return here within a few years, and I hope, if possible, that he will not leave his children there but that we will all be together here, to help one another so as to be together forever.
Today is 17 January 1570.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
17. Concerning the Masses, many have been said and the rest will be said. I took in a nun who had nothing for a dowry, not even a bed, and I offered this to God that you and your children will arrive in good health. Give my regards to them. I am making a similar offering for Señor Jerónimo de Cepeda. I receive many nuns in this way, if they are spiritual, and then the Lord sends others who provide the means for them all.
18. In Medina someone entered with a dowry of 8,000 ducats, and another entered here with 9,000 without my asking for anything. And these cases are so numerous that one can only praise God. If someone has the spirit of prayer, she seeks nothing else, so to speak, than one of these houses; and the number of nuns in them does not exceed thirteen. Since according to our constitutions we do not beg for alms, but we eat what is brought to the turn for us, which is more than sufficient, our number must be small. I think you will be made very happy when you see these houses. With regard to all that is given, no one demands an accounting, nor does anyone see it but me, and that means more work for me.
19. Give my best regards to Señor Pedro de Ahumada. Because he can receive news about me from your honor and I have so little time, I am not writing to him. I am very concerned about Agustín de Ahumada since I do not know how he is faring in his relationship with our Lord. I pray a great deal for him. And I send regards to Señor Hernando de Cepeda. A daughter of his sister's recently married rather well.
