1. Jesus be with your paternity, mi padre. Yesterday I wrote to you by way of Mancera and I sent the letter to the subprior asking him to inquire whether you are in Peñaranda, as you wrote that you would be, and not to let anyone know, even if he be a friar, but to keep the matter to himself. And I included two letters from Roque in which he insists very much that you go immediately to Madrid. Even though he says he is writing to you, I fear that his letters will be intercepted, and so I am writing you myself about what is taking place. If by chance you did not go where you told me you were going, I am sending another messenger to Valladolid and informing Mother Prioress about how she should respond. Roque is very insistent that nothing different be said, for that would be our ruin. He sent me in writing what was sent to her. I have informed the other monasteries. Please God, there will be no need for this, for it is sad to see these souls entrusted to someone who doesn't understand them.
2. Nonetheless, the only thing that worries and distresses me is what concerns my Paul. If only I could see him free. Certainly, I don't know why, but even were I to want to feel disturbed about the rest of things, I could not. The Lord will provide. I would be happy if you stayed up here and didn't go down there. But I am very afraid, for even in your going back and forth to say Mass you cannot avoid danger.
3. I am afraid of how things are going and wish you were gone from there and in a safe place. And let me know where you are, for goodness' sake, so that I don't carry on like a dunce on the day I have to inform you about something, as I am now doing with your code words, which you changed without letting me know the meaning. I deeply wish you would travel with a companion, even if he be a lay brother.
4. Yesterday the prior of Santo Tomás was here. He doesn't think it a bad idea that before going to Madrid you wait for the answer from Joannes to see how everything went, and the rector agrees and so does my brother. I told them that you had written to Joannes. Since the briefs are delivered to the president, I don't see any reason to hurry. There are only two reasons that prompt me to want you to go: First, a great fear that they will take you captive here, and if that were the case (God deliver you!), it would be better for you to go. Second, it would be good to know what the nuncio intends to do with you before you go to see the king. Nonetheless, it would be fitting that your meeting with the nuncio take place in the presence of the president.
5. I wrote this to you in a letter yesterday. There you will see that I believe the Lord will give you light for this since he gives you peace with which to bear it, as I saw from your talks with him. What is happening is that last Sunday, which was the third of this month, Padre Mariano was notified by a brief, which, as I understand, was the same as the one they brought there, although Roque didn't explain much. He only says that it is very wordy and revokes what the previous nuncio did. It must be the same brief you mention, but they don't understand it. And he says it is from the pope, but it must be only from the nuncio because in his reply Padre Mariano says he will obey the orders of the nuncio. Roque says they told him in it not to consider you his superior and to obey no one but the nuncio.
6. I'm delighted about this, and perhaps he will not give as free a hand to these wolves as they think and after all will want to please the king. I don't hesitate to believe what you say about their seeking to put an end to the reforms, and nothing would make me happier than to see you freed from the task, for after that everything will turn out well.
7. Here they haven't notified us of anything, nor have they in Mancera because the provincial hasn't left Avila. They must have to wait for something. Roque says that all monasteries must be notified of the brief and he doesn't say whether this includes those of the friars or not. I already wrote to the prioress in Alba to accept that sister and to Teresa de Layz to give her approval. I am so consoled that God favors you with moments of happiness in the midst of so many trials that I don't know how I could feel sad.
8. I was at this point when the Reverend Padre Rioja arrived at the door with a notary to give notification of the brief. They didn't call me but Mother Prioress. From what I understand of the brief it is the same as the one they must have brought there, for they say it is now under consideration by the royal council. God forgive me, for I am still unable to believe that the nuncio ordered such a thing, I mean in that style. Had you not followed the counsel of so many learned men, I would not be surprised that you were very distressed. But since you proceeded so justly in everything and since you waited almost a year without making any visitations until you knew that the nuncio stated that the faculties had not been revoked, I don't know how one can speak like this. In a certain way, although this distresses me very much, I am inspired with devotion since I know with what prudence you proceeded in the midst of so much wickedness. I tell you, mi padre, God loves you very much and that you are advancing well in imitation of him. I am very happy because God gives you what you ask for, which are trials, and God will come to your defense since he is just. May he be blessed for everything.
9. All the learned men here say that even though the nuncio gives you orders you are not obliged to obey since he does not show the patent letters that support his authority. Oh, what precious treasures these trials are, mi padre! They cannot be bought for any price because through them such a great crown is won. When I recall that our Lord himself and all his saints walked this path, all I can do is envy you, for now I don't deserve suffering, unless it is to feel what one whom I truly love suffers, which is a much greater trial.
10. Tomorrow we will work out an agreement on how Padre Julián de Avila will go to Madrid to show the nuncio our recognition of him as superior and win his favor so as to beseech him not to place us under the jurisdiction of the calced friars. I in turn will write to some persons to get them to try to placate him in your regard and explain how you didn't make any moves until you learned what he said and that you would be ever eager to obey him if it were not for the certitude that Tostado is out to destroy us. Certainly I can sincerely express satisfaction because in exchange for not being subject to the friars of the cloth, everything seems acceptable to me.
11. Julián will ask him for the permissions necessary for these monasteries, such as permission for workmen to enter inside, and things of that sort, for I've been told that as soon as obedience is rendered to him, he immediately becomes our superior.
12. May the Lord grant us his favor, for they cannot oblige us to offend him. The saintly Paul remains at home with me and no one can take away what I promised this saint.
13. The sisters here have regretted the brief most of all because of what it says about you, and they send their best regards and are praying hard for you. There is nothing to fear, mi padre, but praise God that he leads us by the path he followed. May His Majesty keep you for me and be pleased to grant that I may see you free of these conflicts.
Today is the vigil of St. Lawrence.
Your unworthy servant and true daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
