For mi padre, Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián de la Madre de Dios, hand deliver.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. We greatly rejoiced over the letter that Pedro brought filled with hopeful news of good things which, it seems, will not fail to be realized. May our Lord provide in the way by which he will be best served. Nonetheless, until I know that Paul has spoken to Methuselah and how the meeting went I will not be without worry. For goodness' sake when you get news of it, write to me.
2. I felt very sorry about the death of so Catholic a king as was the King of Portugal and angry with those who allowed him to get into such danger. Everywhere we turn the world lets us know that we cannot be sure of any happiness unless we seek it in suffering.
3. In every possible way or, if you will, under whatever conditions strive that we be made a separate province. Even though other trials will not be lacking, it will mean a lot to have security. If, then, those of the cloth also urge the nuncio in this regard -- for I think they would willingly do so -- it would be wonderful. I would not like it if you stopped trying, for if the nuncio sees that no one is opposed he will do so willingly.
4. We were very amused by his response to the calced friars on the action they were to undertake in Medina and on how they might persuade the nuns to obey the provincial of those of the cloth. Valdemoro is there as vicar, for he didn't have a sufficient number of votes to be prior. The provincial left him there as vicar that he might find a solution for the problems in that house. After what happened some time ago, he is on bad terms with Alberta, the prioress. The calced friars go about saying that the nuns owe them obedience and many other things. The nuns are dying from fear of him. I have reassured them.
5. As soon as you think that it would be good on our part to manifest some courteous submission to the nuncio, let us know; and tell us quickly, for goodness' sake, how your meeting with him went. I will be worried until I know, although I have hope in the Lord that so many prayers will bear fruit and that all will go well. I am delighted that you have such good lodging. You needed all this after having suffered such trials. I would like it if you went with the Count of Tendilla the first time you went to see the nuncio. If the nuncio wishes to excuse you, you will be fully clear of blame for all you were accused of.
6. I tell you I am certain that if some influential person were to ask the nuncio to have Fray John set free, he would at once give orders that he be returned to his house. It would be enough to tell the nuncio about this father and how he is kept in prison unjustly. I don't know what is happening that no one ever remembers this saint. If Mariano were to speak to the Princess of Eboli, she would intercede with the nuncio.
7. The fathers of the Society are in a great hurry for Padre Mariano to come, for they are in serious need. If he would not be greatly missed there, I beg you out of charity to arrange that he come. It is a long time that they have been asking for this. Now they are sending a letter to the nuncio so that he might give his authorization. Including the trip here and back, it will take Mariano only five or six days in all. He will only have to stay here for a day or half a day. Do not let all your other business cause you to forget this. Consider how opportune the time is to entrust you with this charge, for though it may seem to be of little importance, it is considered most important here.
8. I don't know how we can repay Don Diego for all we owe him. Payment for so much charity has to come from above. Give him my best regards and tell him I beg him not to leave you until you are safe, for I am frightened by all these deaths that are happening to travelers on their journeys. May God in his divine goodness keep you from danger. I ask Señora Juana
 for prayers; give my regards to the secretary and those ladies. Great is my desire that we will no longer be the cause of so many trials for them.
9. You should know that our Father General wrote a letter to Doña Quiteria as you will see from the enclosed letter. May God forgive the one who informed him so badly. If His Majesty should grant us the favor of being made a separate province, we must then send someone to Rome at once, for I believe we will become his most cherished subjects. Let us be so for His Majesty, and let whatever happens happen. And may he watch over you, amen.
10. They are ringing for Matins, so I'll say no more except that the prioress and sisters are well and feel very calm and ask for your prayers, as does my brother. All of them are most content with the way our affairs are going. My great joy is that the end of those miserable visitations is in sight and that you will not have to be involved in them, which costs me so dearly. Although I desire so much that you be free of having to make visitations, I fear that so great a blessing will not last long.
Today is August 19.
Your unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
God reward you for the image you sent as a gift.
