To my very reverend padre in Christ, Fray Antonio de Segura, guardian of the house of Cadalso. To be delivered at the aforementioned house.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with you mi padre. I don't know how to put in words what little attention we should pay to the things of this world and how little I understand it. I say this because I never thought you would so forget Teresa of Jesus, and since you are so close this couldn't be due to a poor memory. It's hard to believe that you were here and neglected to visit this house, which is yours, and give it your blessing.
2. Now Padre Julián has written me that you are the guardian there in Cadalso. However weak your memory, you could inquire about me now and then. May it please the Lord that you not so forget me in your prayers, for if you remember me in your prayers I will endure the rest; miserable though I am, I do not forget you in mine.
3. He also wrote me that my nephew is coming here, although just in passing. If he has not gone yet, I beg you to have him write to me at length about how he is doing interiorly and exteriorly, for in the measure that he practices obedience along the way, he will be either very proficient or distracted. May God strengthen him, for they are not dealing with him as I thought they would, his being a relative of mine. If it's necessary for me to get his superiors to look kindly toward him, please let me know. For with friends like Señora Doña María de Mendoza and others similar to her, it will be easy to get them to consider allowing him to have a little respite.
4. If you should be passing by, be sure that you do not fail to visit this house, which is yours. May the Lord guide us on the path to heaven. I am well, and we are doing well, glory to God. Since I don't know whether or not Fray Juan de Jesús is there, I am not writing to him. May God give him interior strength, which he will surely need, and may the Lord also be with you.
Your reverence's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
5. Our Padre Fray Bartolomé de Santa Ana will be spending all of this Lent with Doña Luisa in Paracuellos.
