For mi padre, Maestro Fray Padre Jerónimo Gracián.
1. Jesus be with your paternity, mi padre. I had a strong desire to write you a long letter in response to the one you sent me so filled with pessimism and melancholy, but since I had these others to write, which I am enclosing, my head can no longer function. Please have the address put on the enclosed letter to the nuncio, for I'm not doing so lest I make a mistake. One of the ladies there could do it, one whose handwriting may be more like mine.
2. Regarding what I said in the beginning, my Paul is very foolish to have so many scruples. You ought to tell him this. There is nothing to say regarding you. All the learned men say that until he receives notification of the brief your conscience is clear. It would be folly to submit to the nuncio before the president has smoothed the way for you. And the first time you speak to the nuncio you should do so if possible in the presence of the president.
3. Don't go about prophesying, for goodness' sake, for God will do all things well. Now I understand all that Joseph said to me during the absence of Ardapilla, that this was more fitting for our business matters. I don't doubt it since he is so disliked. As for those other hermits, there's no need to pay any attention, for just as God wants evil to be discovered so does he reveal what is good. Mass is not obligatory for you. I inquired about this, but you know the answer yourself. Try to stay there, in great secrecy however. This is what worries me. If while having so good a life you become this pessimistic, what would you have done had you had to suffer what Fray John did?
4. The money will be paid to Antonio Ruiz. If he has not gone, tell him that I already have a hundred bushels and that it is necessary to send the money from Malagón at once; and that is where his bushels will be sent. I haven't the head for writing any more, my good padre. Remain with God, and since you serve as great a lady as is the Blessed Virgin, who prays for you, don't be troubled about anything, although I see you clearly have reason to be troubled.
Warm regards to Señora Juana.
Teresa of Jesus
Tell the president that we are diligently praying to God for his health.
