1. When the previous nuncio died we thought for sure that the visitation had ended. The theologians and law scholars from Alcalá and Madrid, and some from Toledo, with whom we discussed this case said that it had not because the visitation had already been started. They said that although the nuncio died the visitation did not end but had to be completed. They held that if it hadn't commenced then it would have ended with the death of the one giving the faculties. And the president, Covarrubias, said again that because the visitation hadn't ended it should not be stopped. All were in agreement with this.
2. Afterward, when this nuncio arrived he told Gracián to bring him his faculties and the processes. Gracián was wanting to give the whole thing up, but he was advised that the king would be displeased, because he was also under the king's command. He went to the archbishop and told him what was happening. The archbishop scolded him and told him he had the courage of a fly and that he should go and give an account of everything to the king. And when Padre Gracián explained, for love of the nuncio, the disadvantages that could arise, the archbishop replied that anyone can have recourse to a higher authority, and he made him go to speak to the king. The king ordered him to go to his monastery and said that he would inquire into the matter.
3. Some learned men and even the presentado Romero, whom I asked about this here, said that since the nuncio had not shown his faculties for issuing orders in this case, Padre Gracián was not obliged to stop, and they gave many other reasons for this. He had not shown the faculties previously or up to now (unless he has done so within the past ten days). I know definitely that the king would require that he show them.
4. Despite all these opinions Padre Gracián remained nine months -- more or less -- without using his faculties, not even for a signature, even though he knew what the nuncio said and swore that the nuncio had never forbade him to carry on the visitation. And there are many witnesses to this and also to the nuncio's answer to a friar who asked that he remove Gracián, which was that he had no authority to do so.
5. After these months the present president sent for Padre Gracián to order him to resume the visitation. Gracián ardently begged him not to give him such a command. The president responded that this was impossible because it was the will of God and of the king, and that he himself didn't want the office that he held either. And he said other things of this sort. Padre Gracián asked whether he should go to see the nuncio. He said no but that if anything was needed he should have recourse to him. The council furnished him with many writs so that everywhere he could call for help from the secular arm.
6. It had always been thought through what was heard from the nuncio that he did not have authority over religious orders. For since the king was displeased with what he had done so quickly in Gracián's regard without reporting to him, the nuncio didn't do anything. Now we think he has received some superior order from the pope to act the way he does, not that he has shown it to the council or to anyone as far as is known.
7. Padre Gracián became very troubled, for if he paid heed to the nuncio and did not do what the king ordered, we would be lost, without the king's favor, for it is the king who supports and intercedes for us with the pope. This is especially so since it is definitely known that the nuncio was seeking to have Tostado do the visitation, for he was the vicar sent by the general and one of those of the cloth. And we know for certain that Tostado was determined to close down all our houses, in accord with the decision of the general chapter, that only two or three be left of them all, that no more friars be accepted among them, and that they dress no differently from other Carmelites. Only so as to support us did Padre Gracián accept the task of visitator, much to his own affliction.
8. He also found it hard to have to present documentation relative to the faults of the friars of the cloth in Andalusia, for much was told to him in secret. By doing so he would disturb everyone and defame many while not knowing whether the nuncio had the powers to carry out such reforms, for the nuncio had never shown proof of his authority.
9. This is the whole truth, and there are other things as well, which anyone who knew them would see clearly how unjust is the treatment Gracián receives in that brief. He has done nothing without the opinion of good men of learning, for even though he is a learned man himself, he never proceeds on his own. Not showing one's faculties is something new in Spain, for nuncios always show them.
10. See if it would not be good that this information copied in good handwriting be sent to Madrid and given to certain persons.
Teresa of Jesus
