To the very magnificent and reverend señor and padre mio Doctor Pablo Hernández of the Society of Jesus, my lord, in Madrid; hand deliver.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor, padre mío. Eight days ago I received a letter from the prioress in Toledo, Ana de los Angeles, in which she tells me that you are in Madrid. It gave me great consolation since I think God brought you there to give me some relief from my trials. I tell you they are so many -- having started a year ago last August -- and of such variety that it would bring me much relief if I could see you and find rest in recounting some of them to you. It would be impossible to tell you about all of them. To top everything off we are now in the situation that the one who delivers this letter will tell you about. He is a person who loves us much and shares in our distress and is someone we can trust.
2. The devil cannot bear the genuine way in which these discalced friars and nuns serve our Lord. I tell you, you would be consoled to witness the perfection of their life. There are now nine houses of discalced friars and many good subjects in them. Since they have not been joined into a separate province, the disturbances and trials they undergo from those of the cloth are so many as to be indescribable.
3. Now all of our fortune or misfortune, after God, lies in the hands of the nuncio, and, for our sins, those of the cloth have so informed him -- and he gives them so much credit -- that I don't know where it will end up. Of me they say that I am a restless vagabond and that the monasteries I have founded were established without permission from the pope or general. Think of it, what could be more wicked or could there be any worse kind of Christian behavior.
4. Many other things, unrepeatable, do those blessed friars say about me. And as for Padre Maestro Gracián, who was their visitator, it is a pity, the shameful assertions they make against him. I can testify to you that he is one of the greatest servants of God with whom I have dealt and of surpassing honesty and purity of conscience. Believe me I am speaking the truth. After all, he was brought up by the Jesuits in Alcalá as you may know.
5. All this comes from the fact that the nuncio is very mad at him for certain reasons for which, if the nuncio would listen to him, he would find that he deserves little or no blame. And the nuncio is also mad at me, without my having done anything contrary to his service. Indeed, I have most willingly obeyed a brief he sent here and written him as humble a letter as I could.
6. I think it all comes from above, that the Lord wills that we suffer and that there be no one to side with the truth and put in a good word for me. Truly I tell you that I don't feel troubled or distressed over what concerns me personally, rather I feel a special joy. But it seems to me that if it were ascertained that what those fathers are saying about me is not true, then perhaps what they say about Padre Maestro Gracián will not be believed, which is what is most important to us. So I am sending you a copy of the patent letters that authorize our foundations because the nuncio says we are in bad standing for having founded houses without permission. I think the devil is making every effort to discredit these houses. And so I would like there to be servants of God who would defend them. Oh, mi padre, how few are one's friends in time of need.
7. They tell me that the president regards you very highly, that you are in Madrid for his sake. I think he has been informed of all this, and more, by the nuncio. It would be most helpful to us if you could undeceive him, for as an eyewitness, knowing my soul, you can. I believe you will be rendering our Lord a great service. And tell him how important it is to go forward with what was begun for this holy order, for you know how fallen it was.
8. They say that it is a new order with many novelties. Let them read our first rule, for we are doing no more than observe it without mitigation, with the rigor at first given to it by the pope. And let them believe only what they see, and learn about how we live and how the calced friars live and not listen to them. I don't know where they get so many things that are not so, and with these they wage war against us.
9. And I also beg you to speak for me to the nuncio's confessor and give him my regards and inform him about the whole truth so as to oblige him in conscience not to publish things so injurious without first investigating, and tell him that despite my being so wretched, I wouldn't dare do what they are saying. Do this if you think it would be appropriate, otherwise, no.
10. If it seems right to you, you could show him the patent letters, the authority on which I have founded monasteries. One of the letters includes a command that I not stop making foundations. And in one letter our Father General wrote me, after I asked him not to order me to make any more foundations, that he would like me to found as many monasteries as I have hairs on my head. It is not right that so many nuns who are servants of God be discredited through false declarations. Since I have been reared in and given being, as they say, by the Society, I think it would be right to make known the truth so that a person as important as the nuncio (since he comes to reform religious orders -- and he is not from this country) be enlightened about who needs reforming and who needs to be favored. And he should punish the one who goes to him with so many lies. You will see what must be done.
11. What I beg of you for love of our Lord and his precious Mother is that since you have favored us from the time you came to know us that you do so in our present need and defend the truth in the way you think most suitable. Our friars will repay you very well -- and you owe it to my affection for you. And I beg you to keep me informed about everything and mainly about your health. Mine has been very poor, for the Lord has tried me in every way this year. But what regards myself wouldn't pain me much if it were not for the suffering I experience at seeing that on account of my sins these servants of God are suffering. May His Majesty be with you and watch over you. Let me know if you will be residing for long in Madrid, for I've been told you will.
Today is the feast of St. Francis.
Your honor's unworthy and true servant.
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
