To the very magnificent Señor Roque de Huerta, chief forest guard of His Majesty, Madrid.
1. ... with brevity, and send it to me through a trustworthy person, and pay a good portage. I hope in God the outcome will be good, for I don't see in our fathers there the capability of finding a better solution. May God help us with something from that inheritance -- for there will be need of a lot of money -- and allow us to live in peace so that we can serve you in return for the many things for which we are always indebted to you, for otherwise I don't know what would have come of us. Please urge our padre to send me a brief summary of everything.
2. For your assurance I am sending you copies of the authorized patent letters, and I am writing to a father from the Society, who is a good friend of mine and my confessor -- I don't know what office he now holds. He is very good and a close acquaintance of the president's. I ask you to inform him of what I am being silent about, and I am begging you to do so, and tell him of the scandals caused by these fathers and how they held that saint, Fray John of the Cross, for nine months. For you still may not know of what he suffered and the accusations they are making. If the president should want to see the patent letters, give them to him, so that once he has seen them, you may show them to whomever you think should see them. Perhaps he will show them to the president or to the nuncio's confessor. I am also sending the latter a message. Take him aside and speak to him privately.
3. I would like it if some of the lies they tell were investigated so that what involves our padre would not be believed. Consider how beneficial this could prove; don't think it would be a waste of time. Tell him about the nuncio's attitude toward us and how those others have deceived him. Let us do our part, and God will then do what he wills. This is God's cause, and all will end well. My hope is in him; do not be distressed.
4. Let me know where those fathers went. Since I do not think they are there I am not writing to them. If by chance our padre is in Almodóvar, send him these letters by special courier if there is no other trustworthy way, but I don't think he will be there.
5. God be with you. My head can do no more for now. I kiss the hands of those gentlemen many times.
6. You should know that when our general tells me to found as many monasteries as I have hairs on my head, he does so not in a patent letter but in an ordinary letter. The enclosed letters should be sufficient. May God be with you.
It is 4 October.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
7. I was happy to learn of the arrival of Don Alonso and the other news. Please God we will receive a full report.
Be careful not to speak of the matter concerning Rome except with our padre -- even though the other be a friar -- and do whatever could be of benefit. There is no basis to what was said about Fray Juan de Jesús going there.
