1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, mi padre. Because I see you freed from that turmoil, my distress has left me. As for the rest, let whatever comes come. I greatly grieved over the news written to me about our Father General. I feel deep sorrow, and the first day cried and cried without being able to do otherwise. I so regret the trials we caused him, for certainly he didn't deserve them, and if we could have gone to see him, everything would have proceeded smoothly. May God forgive the one who always prevented this, for with you I could have reached an agreement even though in this matter you did not trust my opinion very much. The Lord will bring everything to a good end. But I feel sorry about all this and about what you suffered, for certainly what you wrote to me about in your first letter -- I received two after you spoke with the nuncio -- was like the drink of death.
2. You should know, mi padre, that I was being consumed with anxiety because you were not handing over those documents at once, but probably receiving counsel from someone who feels little grief over what you suffer. I am delighted that now through experience you know how to conduct the business matters along the right path and are not struggling against the current, as I was always pointing out. Indeed, there were certain things that created obstacles everywhere, and so there is no need to talk about this, for God ordains things so that his servants suffer.
3. I wanted to write more at length, but they are coming to collect the letters tonight -- and it is already almost night. I first wrote to the Bishop of Osma to get him to speak with the president and with Padre Mariano about the matter of which I wrote to you. I asked him to keep you informed. Just now I was with my brother, and he sends you his best regards.
4. We are all in agreement here that the friars should not go to Rome -- especially after the death of our Father General -- for these reasons: First, because this plan is not secret, and before they depart, they might be taken captive by the calced friars, which would expose them to death. Second, they would lose their documents and money. Third, they don't have much experience with doing business in Rome. Fourth, on their arrival there, in the absence of Father General, they could be taken for fugitives, for they would end up wandering through the streets without any help, as I am insisting with Padre Mariano. If here with all the favor we enjoy we could not rescue Fray John, what will happen there? Everyone here thinks it would be bad to send friars, especially my brother who is very pained by the way our friars are being treated. It seems to us here that someone should be chosen as our representative to go and press our cause and carry on our business. My brother, especially, thinks this, for he knows the calced friars. He says that this is very important and that everything should be directed to the person about whom I wrote to you. Doctor Rueda has so much trust in him that he doesn't think it is necessary to send any religious.
5. Consider all of this carefully, and if you and Padre Mariano agree with it, send a messenger to Almodóvar and have them cancel the trip of the two friars to Rome, and inform me as soon as possible about what you decide. The one who would go from here is very experienced, although that means that it would cost us more. If for the moment we provide the cost, afterward each house would contribute to it. We could borrow from the Alcalá inheritance and then pay it back, for I certainly don't know how we could get a quick loan here. I am writing about this to Padre Mariano as you will see.
6. Keep well, mi padre, for God will bring everything to a good end. May he be pleased that finally we will all be in agreement and do nothing that would allow the friars to turn us into martyrs.
May God keep you, amen.
Your paternity's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
7. It's terrible now the way everything is going, and the devil is helping them. I tell you that he did a good deed for himself when he took the great angel away from us and gave us the dawdler who is in now. I don't know how this blunder happened, but I believe that if Ardapilla had been involved it could have been worse. Now I see, mi padre, what a martyrdom you suffered in finding yourself caught between contrary opinions. Had you been given the freedom to proceed according to your own discernment, it would have been clearly seen that God was guiding you. All these daughters send their best regards.
8. I am glad you told them not to discuss this with anybody. Let us go slowly and move ahead with the plan for Rome, for time smoothes things over and there they will settle everything, as you say. I would only like to be nearby where we could see each other frequently, which would be a great consolation for my soul. I don't deserve this, but deserve only cross upon cross. On condition that you be spared, well and good if the cross comes.
9. I am reasonably well, although this head of mine is in a sorry state. God be with you always. Don't tire of writing frequently, for goodness' sake. I am delighted they are not going to elect a provincial, for according to what you say, doing this would be inappropriate. Even though Fray Antonio told me they were obliged under pain of sin to elect a provincial, I did not contradict him. I thought that everything could be concluded here, but if they have to go to Rome for the confirmation, they will also have to go in order to become a separate province. Keep me informed about all that needs to be done in the event that they accept what I proposed.
Today is 15 October.
Your paternity's subject and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
