1. Jesus be with you, my lord. I received the letter you wrote to me on the feast of St. Luke. But in it you do not tell whether you received the supplicatory letters that I sent you. As a result, I am a little worried. In fact, that letter of yours addressed to me to obtain permissions from our Father General as well as from our Father Visitator, the Dominican Padre Fray Pedro Fernández, and finally from Fray Angel, was certainly sent from here. But indeed it seems it ended up in the hands of the Bishop of Osma. It would be regrettable if it was lost along with my previous letter. I ask you then to inform me in this regard. Now, however, I am not as worried over the fact that you might think you have been responsible, as though in this entire affair you committed or caused the commission of some fault. If there is anyone who has little reason to torment himself in this matter, it is certainly you.
2. The letters of convocation for the chapter held on 9 October were promulgated. I have read them. What the constitutions order to be observed is mentioned in them: let no one be guilty, neither in small matters nor in great, of a transgression or offense against God. Also promulgated is the injunction against going forward with the house of Santa Ana, in effect until tranquility is restored to the province at the end of the visitation.
3. Padre Fray Antonio de Jesús has consulted learned men who affirmed that he was bound in conscience, and he wrote me about this. I answered that if this was really the case, God would in no way be offended; he could do as he wished ... insofar as otherwise they would cast us headlong into tribulation.
4. The Archbishop of Seville, whom it is right that we obey completely, is firm in these words, asserting that he did not do otherwise. Truly in this whole affair he has no reason for moving against those whose only intention was to please and serve God. It seems prudent nonetheless, taking into account the testimonies that were given and the information received, and in consideration of the persons implicated, not to become involved in the promotion of the cause. Rather one should remain silent until it is seen more clearly what the wiser thing to do might be.
5. They were convinced that so things should be if his submission won them over. But in this regard they were mistaken, for from that moment the nuncio seized the occasion to show that he paid little attention to all their efforts. They tried everything, but he was deprived of the power to do anything. Nonetheless, it could be that things will turn out better for him. I cannot convince myself that he had wanted to propose a superior for them chosen from among their own discalced friars, since, as I also made known to you, I cannot rid myself of this suspicion that stays with me as if I were an accomplice in the whole affair. I beg you to try to find out from the Count of Tendilla if he ever mentioned a desire to appoint one of the discalced friars, those observing the primitive rule. What he says corresponds to the truth, but could be interpreted as referring as well to the other Carmelites. Perhaps I alone am the cause of this misfortune in that I called the other one provincial, providing the Bishop of Osma, who was the first to write to Rome, a good occasion for doing so.
6. O unfortunate friars, called by their superior to a chapter that became the sole reason for their imprisonment. Padre Antonio received much in writing against his convoking the chapter at this time. Now I am begging these unfortunate friars to be silent for the love of God and to wait and not do anything precipitously in this regard. There is no doubt that they have given the nuncio good reason for being angry. In the very beginning he was forewarned by the other Carmelites.
7. Now believe me, I was never able to bring myself to approve this chapter; it displeased me very much. As a result, I was not one of its promoters. However, others who weighed the matter better than I, made a judgment in its favor.
8. I beseech you for the love of our Lord that, to the best of your ability, you do all you can to avoid arriving at any settlement before the matter has been brought to the attention of Rome. I would be greatly displeased if anything took place without permission from our padre and the others who are there. Please send me at once news about these things. Tell our padre and Padre Fray Antonio that in the meantime they should have patience until God provides a remedy.
9. See how all of this is the work of God who wills that his servants be exercised in patience and put you to the test so that you do not grow fainthearted in those things that pertain to the service of His Majesty. There is hope that Padre Antonio will depart soon -- he is old and sick and our padre would find it difficult to do without his presence and help. If the nuncio bases his judgments on the information and testimony coming from Andalusia, Padre Antonio would be at a loss on how to defend against this and the situation would go from bad to worse. As you yourself will see, this is a question of great importance.
10. Enclosed is a letter addressed to Padre Fray Diego de Chaves. Also enclosed for you are the chapter acts transcribed by the one from whom I have received them. No one should read them except you and Padre Mariano, who would have an interest in them. Afterward let Padre Chaves present them to the king; or if he thinks it more prudent, give an account of all that took place while defending the whole affair and the persons involved and explaining that Padre Antonio used the greatest care in making known and energetically publishing the act of convocation and without any offense against God. The fact that he may not have acted entirely well in this matter does not mean he was purposely neglectful or had any bad intention; of this I am certain. Therefore I would like you to hold fast to this assertion and get the others to hold fast to it as well. If we are not united, or you with us, or we with the others, a great trial will come upon us. And people will think badly of you and so will Padre Mariano. I don't have time now to write to Padre Mariano. It is best that, in seeing that others had not wanted to follow his advice, he be led by charity and not think he has any reason to become angry with them. Many such adversities occur in the life of men. I ... Padre Fray Antonio, if you are informed about it, must be very dejected.
11. By that time the deed was done, nor you ... We are greatly indebted to the count. He impels me to praise God. Undoubtedly, our order owes him much; so we must pray always to the divine Majesty for him. May God protect him, and you as well. I beg you not to become discouraged. Few there are with a competence like yours. A good work will be done if you can obtain freedom for Padre Fray Antonio, Padre Mariano, and Padre Juan de Jesús. And may Jesus be always with you.
12. Don't torment yourself any further. God knows how to draw good from evil. And the good is all the greater in the measure that we diligently strive that he not be offended in anything.
Today is 24 October.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
13. I kiss many times the hands of those ladies. The rumor is going about in Avila that the pope has died. But there is no news about this here. It doesn't seem to be true. I am enclosing a letter to our padre, in which I inform him about everything that is taking place. Be very careful so that it reaches him safely.
14. Take care also that you get back the enclosed letter to Padre Chaves so that you can read it. He will be able to inform you well and tell you about all the trials we are undergoing. Don't forget to write frankly to Padre Mariano about all the other things that are going on. For lack of space I must close this letter.
