1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I am enclosing a letter for Padre Maestro Chaves. In it I tell him that you will inform him about the state of our affairs. Look for an occasion to give it to him and speak with him and tell him about how these blessed fathers are treating us. I think the letter will be efficacious because I beg him with urgency to speak to the king and tell him about some of the harm that we nuns suffered when we were subject to them. May God forgive them, for they burden you with so much work that I don't know where you get the strength.
2. I understand well that the cost for doing this must be great, and it bothers me that on account of the expenses I have here I cannot do as much as I would like. Even though I would like to help those fathers for their trip to Rome, I don't see how I can, for these monasteries must pay their share for the project I am undertaking, which will not be small if everything is brought to a conclusion. But I consider all our effort worthwhile, for if we obtain peace, then we can do what I desire for the one to whom we are so obliged.
3. By the enclosed information you will see what little effect the royal provision has on these fathers. I don't know if they would have any respect even for the king himself, accustomed as they are to getting away with whatever they want, and things are going well for them here. I assure you that having to deal with them now is like struggling in the most dangerous quicksand that exists. Since you tell me they obeyed in Pastrana and Alcalá and I don't know if they responded as we nuns did, let me know for goodness' sake, for our padre doesn't write anything about this to me. He must not have gone.
4. I received all the documents you sent. They came too late for these other houses. Let us know how they might be of benefit to us, unless the officials of justice are receiving orders to send these fathers into exile or something like that. This morning was a time of judgment. All who were there (the justices, the learned men, and the gentlemen) were astonished by their irreverent behavior, and I was very distressed. I would have gladly refused to listen to them, but we did not dare say anything.
5. Believe me, they cannot truthfully say they saw us do anything blameworthy here. Pedro was at the door and when he saw them he went to tell my brother. I regretted that my brother brought the magistrate with him, for doing so was useless. What their imaginations dream up will perhaps be given more credit than the truths we assert. For goodness' sake tell our padre about everything that has happened -- for I don't have time to write to him -- and let me know how they all are.
6. The letter from Valladolid that I told you to read and send on to our padre got mixed up with another, for though it was supposed to go, it was left here. It told of how things went with the friars and gave an account of everything, but I told them to write to you about it and also to Medina.
7. Tell me if you heard anything about Fray Baltasar, for he went to see the nuncio, and if those calced friars can legitimately serve notice to our fathers. Here they say that according to the brief only the provincial can do so; I don't know if they are right.
8. You should know it is being said that they are going to bring me to another monastery. If it be one of their own, they would treat me worse than they did Fray John of the Cross! At one moment today I asked myself if they were sending me notice of some excommunication, for a small piece of paper was included with the large one. I don't merit to suffer as much as Fray John of the Cross did!
9. I was extremely delighted that at such a favorable time ...
