To the very magnificent Señor Roque de Huerta, chief forest guard of His Majesty.
Jesus be always with your honor, amen. I received your letter and because I am sending you a reply by another route, I will not be long. I only beg you to let me know through this carrier if you have received my letters and how many. I wouldn't want them to get lost as they are very important. I worry until I know that they have been delivered into your hands. So, through the first messenger let me know and do me the favor of giving the enclosed from my brother to Captain Cepeda. Entrust it into safe hands, and keep me informed about everything using the carrier who will give you the letters that I mentioned, for I believe that this will be the safest method.
May our Lord grant you his holy grace. Give my regards to Señora Inés and t1. My lady, you should know that for a long time in all his prayer and with great desires he was asking for trials from our Lord. I saw in this that His Majesty was disposing him for those that he had to give him. And what trials they have been! Blessed be God's name. Now he must find that his soul has so benefited that he doesn't recognize himself. He has enabled us all to receive benefit greatly. I have had very much in mind the pain you both have suffered; but you, too, will have drawn gain from this.
2. When I see that the ones still detained have also been released -- and we will certainly see them free because they will not have so many accusers -- my happiness will be complete. For I am sure, as I said, that our Lord will take care of the negotiations that matter most. There are so many good souls begging this of him, and he will do what contributes best to his glory and service.
3. May His Majesty guide and keep you and the lord secretary as well, whose hands I kiss along with the hands of all those ladies. The sisters here kiss your hands. They are very happy with what has been done. I also am because of what I mentioned. Nonetheless, all of us have to do some penance, for the letters from our padre were always good for our souls and we read them together as though they were sermons. Even this the devil wants to take from us. God is over all.
Today is the feast of the Holy Innocents.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
hose ladies.
Today is Sunday, 28 December.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
