1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I am sorry about the distress our affairs cause you. You should know that they do not disturb me that much, for I understand that they are from God and that His Majesty looks after our affairs more than we do. So, with whatever happens I will be content, for many prayers have been offered for this intention, and by good souls. Thus, perhaps what seems to us most adverse is what is most fitting for his service. Thus you should not be disturbed about anything. The end of the world is not at hand.
2. Since I see that those fathers are well and that justice is being observed, there is nothing to fear. Even if justice is not being observed, there is no better time than now for us to suffer without fault. Furthermore they tell me the nuncio is very much the servant of God, and so he will gather information about everything, and the same goes for the other judges. Since it is forbidden to write or speak to those fathers, there is no point in writing to them, but I would love to console them and tell them how I envy them.
3. I have already received the letter that came by way of Toledo and also this one that Pedro Ries brought, so filled with doubts that it made me laugh and praise our Lord for your charity and how much you take our affairs to heart. Some day we will be able to serve you.
4. The judges are more than right in saying that they will not do anything as a favor. It wouldn't be real justice if anyone were moved by favoritism rather than the truth.
5. Señora María de Montoya is wrong to think that it has ever entered our minds that the letters brought to the canon will be sufficient to bring our affairs to a close. His Majesty has to do this. But the letters usually help by recommending the petitioners as religious persons and considered to be so in Spain. The more this is said of them, the better.
6. Doctor Rueda sent me the enclosed letters to be delivered to his majesty, the king. Give them to him yourself and tell him I kiss his hand. I would like to have written to the count. I kiss his lordship's hands many times. We were very happy to learn of his son's health. Tell him this and that we are comforted to know that he is in Madrid.
7. Would you send the letter addressed to the prior of St. Augustine's to someone who will hand deliver it, and do not let on that it comes from me or from you. Believe me, that could do us harm. And the one addressed to the discalced Franciscan father should also be sent through a reliable person, for this father is a very good friend of mine. The other one is from my brother. I beg you to give it to the one to whom it is addressed and tell him to send the answer to you, and then send that to me, and pardon me. Except for this last one the letters are very important for the matter that concerns us.
8. I always notice that these letter-carriers deliver the letters to you safely and to me also. There's no need for other roundabout ways. Since these fathers now have what they want, they won't be so diligent. Take care to seal the letter well.
9. Be assured that if I could see our Padre Gracián freed from the task of visitator, I think the rest would be bearable. This is what always tormented me. And if they were to send someone from any other order, I would be truly content, as long as he would not be one of these fathers of ours.
May God provide, as he can, and protect you and those ladies, for whose prayers I beg.
Today is the 12th.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
