To the very magnificent Señor Diego Ortiz, my lord.
1. Jesus. May our Lord bestow his divine grace on your honor. I had very much wanted to meet with you during these days, and so I sent word beseeching you in this regard. Since you are not going to grant me this favor and the time has arrived for my departure (which I believe will be tomorrow), I want to tell you about what we began discussing the other day in regard to the sung Masses on Sundays and feast days. I have been thinking about the matter these days, for I had not given it much thought before you spoke to me; nor did I think it necessary to speak about it, for my intention seemed clear in the written agreement. But they tell me I must clarify some things.
2. What I intended was that the chaplains be obliged to sing a Mass on feast days, for then our constitutions prescribed this, but not that the nuns be obliged to sing, for in their rule this is optional. Even if the constitutions do prescribe singing, they do not on this matter bind under any sin. How could I make this an obligation for the nuns! I wouldn't do it for anything, nor did you or anyone ask me for such a thing. I spoke in this way for the sake of our convenience. If in writing this down I made an error, it wouldn't be right to demand of them what should be voluntary. And since they are willing to serve you and ordinarily sing the Masses, I beg you that when some need arises for them you consider it a good thing to allow them their freedom. I beg your forgiveness that this is written in someone else's hand, for the bloodletting has left me weak, and my head can't do anything more. May our Lord keep you.
3. Señor Martín Ramírez pleased me very much. May the Lord be pleased to make him his servant and keep you for the good of all. You will be doing me a great favor if you clarify the matter concerning the Masses. And since the Mass is sung almost every day without the nuns' being obliged, it would be right for you to remove this scruple of ours and make the nuns and me happy in a matter that has so little importance, for we all want to serve you.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
