1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, mi padre, and reward you for the consolation you have given me through the hope I can have of seeing you, which will certainly be a great joy for me. And so I ask you for the love of our Lord to arrange for this to come about, for the loss of a joy is not as disturbing as it is when the lost joy is what one was hoping for. I think His Majesty will be served if you come.
2. This happiness has helped me receive well the election of a new superior. May it please our Lord that he hold the office for only a short time. I don't mean that he die, for after all he is the most talented one among them; and with us, he will be very restrained, especially because he has the good sense to understand where a thing will end up. In a way those fathers were dealt with as badly as we. For persons seeking perfection, we couldn't desire anyone more befitting than the Señor Nuncio, for he has made us all gain merit.
3. I praise our Lord that Padre Fray Gregorio has already arrived at his house. And I will do the same if you succeed in having the prioress of Seville reinstated, for it is certainly the right thing to do. And if not her, then Isabel de San Francisco, for the present one is a mockery and will end up destroying the house. May the Lord direct everything for his greater service, and reward you for the care you take in looking after those poor foreigners. Since the provincial of the fathers of the cloth is not in command over them, they will feel greatly relieved, for they will be able to write and receive letters. I wrote to them through the prior of Las Cuevas, and I wouldn't mind if the letter fell into the provincial's hands, for I wrote it with this intention.
4. The traveler has everything ready now, and the more I deal with him, the more hope I have that he will do everything very well. We had an argument here because I wanted a copy made of the letter to the king so as to send it with the first shipment of mail to the canonist Montoya along with a parcel of letters that I am now sending his mother for delivery to him. And I am writing him that this letter will be brought to him now, or if not, that two fathers will bring it who are going to Rome to render obedience to our Father Vicar General. And it seems to me that in a matter so serious it is good to proceed along two different paths, for we are not certain of the successful outcome of a particular path. And it would be a troublesome thing in our present situation to have to wait for another trip to be made. Also, since the canonist has already taken up this cause, it is better not to turn aside from his help -- as time goes on, he will prove a good friend, and this business is no easy matter -- for that would do harm. And I hold that it is better for him to do the negotiating and that those fathers go directly to Father Vicar General. I have little trust that their mission will remain a secret, and if they go about negotiating with this one and that and the vicar general finds out, he will perhaps be displeased that they did not come to him first, something that would not be so with the canonist.
5. Padre Fray Juan says that if the canonist does the negotiating there is no reason for him to go, but there is so much to do that there will perhaps be need for both of them. Would to God that he would find that the negotiations were finished. It would still be no small matter if discalced friars got to be known there who had more religious spirit and substance than those seen before. And these friars could explain everything to Father Vicar General. It also seems to him that he would be spending ...
