For Madre Isabel de San Jerónimo and Madre María de San José, discalced Carmelite nuns at St. Joseph's in Seville.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. I received your letter and that of my sisters the day before yesterday. O Jesus, and what a great consolation it would be for me to be present now in that house, just as it would have been for me before so as to share in the treasures our Lord has given you in such abundance! May he be blessed forever! Amen.
2. The love I had for you has doubled to the extreme, even though it was great; and for you especially since you are the one who has suffered the most. But be assured that when I learned that they had deprived you of your office, voice, and standing in the community, I felt a particular consolation. For even though I know that my daughter Josefa is very wretched, I am convinced that she fears God and would not have done anything against His Majesty that would deserve such punishment.
3. I wrote you a letter through mi padre, the prior of Las Cuevas, so that he may have it delivered to you. I would like to know if he received it, and another one that was for him, and to whom he gave it, even if I have to write again. When Padre Nicolao learned of what happened with your brother's letter, he tore it up. You owe him very much. You have fooled him more than Padre Garciálvarez.
4. I am sorry that he may no longer say Mass there, although it is the house that loses thereby; for him a great trial is being removed. Certainly we owe him a lot, but I don't know what can be done. If the most reverend archbishop has not listened to the prior of Las Cuevas or to Padre Mariano, I don't know who will be able to do anything.
5. In a way, these notes from Padre Mariano have irritated me -- that it could even pass through his mind that such a thing be sought in that house, or even spoken of. The fact is that the devil in the excess of his fury has wanted to afflict us in every way, especially in ... Now it seems our Lord does not wish to give him so much license, and I hope His Majesty will so ordain that the truth will be discovered.
6. In that house there has been little truth. It distressed me very much when I learned of the statements made in the process and of some things that I knew were seriously false, since they had to do with the time when I was living there. Now that I have seen what is happening with those sisters, I have given great thanks to our Lord for not having allowed them the opportunity to raise any more calumnies.
7. These two souls have worn me out, and we all need to pray especially that God will give them light. Ever since Garciálvarez began acting in such a way, I feared what I now see. If you recall I wrote twice that I believed that the trouble came from within the house, and I even named one person -- Margarita never entered my mind -- so that you would be on your guard. The truth is that I was never satisfied with her spirit, although sometimes I thought my dissatisfaction was a temptation and that I was a wretch. And I even spoke of the matter with Padre Maestro Gracián. Since he spoke with her so often, I brought his attention to the matter, and so now I have not been very surprised. And it is not that I thought she was bad, but deluded through an unstable imagination, a ready prey for the wiles of the devil, the one behind this. He knows very well how to profit by one's natural condition and poor judgment. So, there is no reason to blame her so much but to have great pity on her. In this case you and all the other sisters must do me the favor of not turning aside from what I am now going to tell you, and believe that, in my opinion, it is the suitable thing to do. And you should praise the Lord that he did not permit the devil to tempt any of you so strongly. For as St. Augustine says, we should think that if he had, we would have done worse things. Do not desire, my daughters, to lose what you have gained at this time. Remember what St. Catherine of Siena did for the one who accused her of being a bad woman and let us fear, let us fear, my sisters. If God were to withdraw his hand from us, what evils might we not commit? Believe me, this sister has neither the mind nor the talent for inventing such things, and so the devil arranged to give her this other companion, and she certainly must have been the one who taught her. God be with her.
8. First, I say that you should heartily recommend her to His Majesty at all times in all your prayers, as we will here, that he might enlighten her and that the devil will let her awaken from this dream in which he holds her fast. I consider her to be a person partly deranged. You should know that I know some persons, although not in these houses, with unstable imaginations who think they truly see everything that comes into their minds; the devil must prompt them in this. And my grief is that he must have made this sister think that she sees what in his opinion is suited to bringing about the ruin of that house. And perhaps she is not as much to blame as we think, as is so with a madman who, if he really gets it into his head that he is God the Father, no one can convince him otherwise. Here you ought to manifest, my sisters, the love you have for God by showing her great compassion, just as you would if she were the daughter of your parents; for she is the daughter of this true Father to whom we owe so much and whom the poor little soul has desired to serve all her life. Pray, sisters, pray for her. Many saints have also fallen and have returned to being saints. Perhaps all this was necessary for her humility. If God should grant us the favor that she come to her senses about what she has done and retract it, we will have all gained through suffering, and it could be the same for her, for God knows how to draw good from evil.
9. Second, don't let it enter your minds for now to have her leave your community. That would be a great folly and by no means appropriate, for the more you think you are getting rid of hazards, the more you will encounter them. Let time pass, for this is not the moment for such a change. I could give many reasons for this, and I am surprised that you do not see them. Think about this, and God will show them to you, and trust in His Majesty and in those of us who are considering with more calm what is suitable for your community. For now be careful not to speak about such a move and don't even let it enter your mind if possible.
10. Do not manifest toward them any kind of dislike, and be even more gracious to the one who was superior, all the nuns showing her sisterly kindness, and they should do so toward the other nun also. Try to forget the things that took place and let each one consider what she would like done if this had happened to her.
Be certain that this soul must be undergoing a real torment even though she may not be aware of it. The devil will see to that, since he didn't succeed in doing anything worse. He could induce her to take some action that would cause her to lose both her soul and her mind. For the latter it would perhaps require little. This is what we all ought to consider and not what she did. Perhaps the devil led her to think that her soul was gaining and she was rendering great service to God. Don't say a word to her mother, for I feel very sorry for her. How is it that no one says anything to me about how she bore all these things and what she said -- I've wanted to know this -- and whether she knew about her daughter's schemes?
11. I fear that now again the devil will stir up in them other temptations -- that you wish them harm and treat them badly -- and it would make me very angry if you gave them any occasion for so thinking. I have already been informed that those in the Society do not think it right that she be treated badly. Be very careful.
12. Fourth, that she not be allowed to speak to anyone without another nun present -- someone very astute. Nor should she confess to anyone but a discalced friar. He may be one chosen by her since Father Vicar General has ordered that they be your confessors without exception. Take care, without showing it, that the two not speak much to each other. Don't put any restrictions on them -- for we women are weak -- until the Lord begins to heal them. And it wouldn't be bad to keep her busy with some duty as long as it would in no way allow her to have contact with outsiders, but only with those living inside the monastery. Her being alone and with only her thoughts can do her much harm, and so now and again let those who think they could be of help spend some time with her.
13. I believe that before Padre Nicolao goes down there we will have a meeting together -- I would like it to be soon -- and talk more about everything. For now, out of charity, do what I tell you. At any rate, those who really desire to suffer do not bear any bitterness toward the ones who do them harm, but rather more love. From this you will see whether you have benefitted from the time in which you had to bear the cross. I hope in our Lord that he will soon provide a remedy and that the house will remain as it was before; and even better, for our Lord always gives back one hundred percent.
14. Consider that I am again urgently asking that you in no way talk with one another about what happened, for no benefit can come from so doing, but much harm. In the future it will be necessary to proceed with great care. As I have said, I fear that the devil will lure poor Beatriz -- the other one I'm not so worried about, for she's smarter -- into some vile scheme, or tempt her to leave. Keep careful watch, especially at night. Since the devil is working to discredit these monasteries, he at times makes possible that which seems impossible.
15. If the bond between these two sisters is broken and something happens that puts them at odds with each other, they will come closer to getting to the bottom of things, and the door will be opened for them to become disillusioned with each other. You will notice that the friendlier they are with each other, the more support they will find for their intrigue. Prayer can do much, and so I hope the Lord will enlighten them. They cause me much grief.
16. If it's a solace for you to write down all that happened, it would not be bad for you to do so in order to learn from the experience, for on account of my sins I do not learn from that of others. But if Sister San Francisco is going to be the historian, she should not exaggerate but state very simply what has taken place. A copy ought be made by my daughter Gabriela. I would like to write to all the nuns, but my head isn't up to it. I have called down many blessings on you, the blessing of the Blessed Virgin, our Lady and of the entire Most Holy Trinity.
17. You have rendered a service to the whole order; those especially who have not made profession have proved well that they are your daughters. And I pray that they may be so more and more. And let those who have written me consider this letter as meant for them. For even though it is addressed particularly to Madre María de San José and the vicaress, my intention is that it be for all the nuns.
18. I would have liked to write to my sister Jerónima. Tell her that she has greater reason to regret the discredit that Padre Garciálvarez's departure brings to the house than what has happened to him; he is well known in Seville. The poor foreigners are the ones who have to carry the whole burden. It was clear that once it was thought that he committed some fault, the nuns could not be excused from any. But I am sure that, as I say, his virtue is well known. As for the rest, he has been relieved of a heavy load. Certainly we could never exaggerate all that he has endured here and all that we owe him, nor could we repay him for it; only God can.
19. Give him my best regards. I would have written him at great length had my head been up to it, and what I would like to say is expressed poorly in a letter. I am not going to write then, for I might get into some complaining. Since others know about the great misdeeds those two blessed souls said were committed in the house, you would not have been going to extremes by keeping me informed at times -- seeing that I was the one who would find it most painful -- and not wait for those who have so little love for us, as everyone knows, to find a remedy. In the end, the truth suffers but does not perish, and so I hope that the Lord will make it known more and more.
20. Give my regards to good Serrano. I look for the day in which we can repay him for all we owe him. To my holy prior of Las Cuevas send my best wishes. Oh, if I could spend an entire day with him! May God watch over you for me and make you as holy as I beg him to, amen. These sisters have wept more over your trials than I have, and they beg for your prayers. I will write again soon, and the matter concerning Madre San José that you recommend to me will perhaps be settled by the time this arrives. You are doing well now; don't be in a hurry. There's no reason to hold the election until you receive directions to do so from here; there's no lack of diligence here in attending to this matter.
21. If Padre Mariano is there, send this letter to him and have him return it. Since I don't think a letter from me will reach him there, I am not writing now. Give my regards to Padre Fray Gregorio. I would like to have a letter from him. As for the Mass, I don't know what to tell you; don't be in a hurry. If you do not have anyone to say it for you, don't kill yourselves. Let the nuns be satisfied with Sunday Mass until the Lord provides. Thus they will not miss the opportunity for gaining merit. I am feeling fairly well.
22. Padre Julián has been distressed about your trials. I believe that if he thought he could do something to free you from them, he would willingly go down there. He begs you for your prayers. May God give you the strength to suffer more and more, for you have not yet shed your blood for him who shed all of his for you. I assure you that we have not been idle up here.
Today is the feast of The Finding of the Cross.
Teresa of Jesus
23. Oh, how distressed my brother was about your trials! It was necessary to console him. Pray for him, for you owe it to him.
To Madre Isabel de San Jerónimo, the vicaress, I say that all the counsels she gives in her letter seem very good to me and show more courage than Madre San José's. My regards to Sister Beatriz de la Madre de Dios and tell her I rejoiced that she is now without a trial, for in a letter I received from her, she told me what a great trial that office was for her. Give my best wishes to Sister Juana de la Cruz.
