For Mother Prioress and my sisters and daughters of Mount Carmel in the monastery of Valladolid.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my mother, and all those dear sisters of mine. I want you to keep in mind that from the time that house was founded I have never asked you, that I can remember, to accept a nun without a dowry or anything else of consequence, which has not been the case with other communities. In one community they have accepted eleven nuns without dowries. Not for this reason are they worse off; their situation is the best of all. Now I want to ask you to do something that you are obligated to do for the good of the order and for various other reasons. And although it lies in your own interest to do this, I want to assume the debt myself, and I ask that you do me this favor. I am worried that what is so important for the service of God and for our peace might fail for lack of money.
2. The enclosed letters from a discalced father, the prior of El Calvario, who has arrived in Rome, show what urgent need there is for two hundred ducats. Since the discalced friars have no one in charge, they can't do anything. Fray Juan de Jesús and the prior of Pastrana -- who have also gone to Rome, although I don't know if they have arrived -- could collect so little that without what I gave them, they brought only one hundred fifty ducats, which they got from Beas. It is a great grace from our Lord that some of our houses can contribute to this need, for after all it arises but once in a lifetime.
3. Padre Nicolao writes me from Madrid that he has found a person who out of deference to him will advance two hundred ducats in view of Sister María de San José's dowry on the condition that your house send him a promissory letter. He will be satisfied with this even if you delay reimbursing him. I consider this very fortunate, and so I ask you out of charity that as soon as this letter arrives you call for a notary so as to testify that sister has made her profession. Thus the action will be completely valid, for without this nothing can be done. Send it to me at once along with your promissory letter. The two statements should not be together, but kept on separate pages. Note how important it is that you act quickly.
4. If the amount seems a lot to you and you are wondering why all the houses don't contribute, I tell you that each house does do what is possible, and any house that cannot give anything, like this one, doesn't give anything. This is why we all wear the same habit, that we might help one another, for what belongs to one belongs to all. And he who gives all that he can gives a great deal. How much more so because expenses are so high that it's frightening. Sister Catalina de Jesús can affirm this. If the houses do not provide the money, I cannot earn it, for I am crippled. Moreover, it pains me to have to go around raising money and begging. Certainly for me it is a torment, and only for God can I bear it.
5. Apart from this I now have to raise two hundred ducats that I promised Montoya, the canonist, for he has given us life; and please God that amount will be enough and bring all this to an end. It is a great mercy that money can play a role in the attainment of so much peace.
What I have said is a matter of obligation. What I am about to say now is up to you, although it seems reasonable to me and something that will be pleasing to both God and the world.
6. You well know that you received Sister María de San José because of her brother, our Padre Gracián. Her mother, being in serious need, postponed her daughter's entry there -- from what I've learned -- until she could negotiate over those four hundred ducats. She thought the charity you extended to Padre Gracián would remain in effect and that with the promised ducats she could provide for her own needs, which as I say are many. Now I am not surprised that she is upset at having to give up her plan. But she is so good that despite everything she does not cease being grateful for the favor that has been shown her. With regard to the one hundred ducats, you already know from Padre Maestro Gracián's letter, which I sent you, that he requests that you deduct all that his mother spent on her daughter, which amounts to the one hundred ducats that he mentions there. So the promissory letter should be for three hundred ducats.
7. Don't pay much attention to whether she will inherit anything or not, for everything they have comes from the king's generosity; they have no income. And when the secretary dies, they will receive nothing. As for whatever is left, there are so many brothers and sisters that it would be useless to bother about it, as she wrote me afterward. I don't know if I saved the letter, if I did I will send it to you. Anyway, the promissory letter should be for at least three hundred ducats.
8. What I say is that it would be nice if you would promise the whole four hundred, for she would not fail to send you the other hundred when she has received the money. And even if she doesn't, she definitely deserves something for all the bitter afflictions -- the present ones and others too -- she has had to suffer on account of her son; they have been terrible ever since he was given the task of making visitations. All of this I say apart from what is owed to our Padre Gracián, for if so many nuns have been accepted into the order without a dowry, all the greater is the reason that something be done for him.
9. For her sister who is in Toledo, the nuns did not ask for either a bed or a trousseau or a habit or anything, nor was anything given for her. And they would very willingly have accepted another sister of hers under the same conditions if she had desired to enter there. For God has given them such qualities and talents that the nuns would desire this other one rather than someone else with a dowry. With regard to the one hundred ducats, do whatever you think best. As for the rest, nothing else can be done, for the need is urgent.
10. What must be done when the negotiations in Rome are over is to consider what each house is entitled to and return money to those who have given more. And so this will include your house. For the present let us help one another as we can. I ask Mother Prioress not to oppose what the sisters want to do, for I am very confident that they are no less daughters of the order than the sisters in our other houses who are doing what they can.
May God make you all as holy as I beg of him, amen.
Your servant,
Teresa of Jesus
11. In any case, let Sister Catalina de Jesús read this letter to everyone -- I would be very much saddened if anything were omitted -- and the other enclosed letters from Rome as well.
