1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence and repay you and all the sisters there for the happy Pentecost you gave me by sending the promissory letter with such good will. It came just in time, for the messenger had not yet left for Madrid. They had written urging me to hurry, so I was overjoyed.
2. I assure you that even had the money been given for my own use, I could not be more grateful. You have all shown your generosity and in a gracious way. May the Holy Spirit repay you. I am asking God to give you back much more than you have given. Read this part to the sisters. I recommend myself very much to their prayers. I wrote to Madrid about what you said so that they could see what they possess in all of you.
3. I have written so much today and it is so late that I will be able to say little here. The first thing, for goodness' sake, is that you take care of yourself so that if God brings me there, I will find you in good health. Father Vicar, Fray Angel, has somewhat implied this possibility in a letter to me. There's some hope. But since I would be just passing through, I wouldn't want to come. It would mean traveling many leagues only to feel more pain for having to leave you so soon. He wrote that he has thought of making me gain merit by confirming an order that I go to Malagón, for by so doing I would gain more merit than if I made a foundation and that on the way I could go to console Lord and Lady de Mendoza, for they are requesting this. And he is sending me the letter from the bishop, saying that I should go at once to Salamanca and buy the house. And you ought to know, my daughter, that there is the greatest need of my going there, and they are as silent as the dead, which urges me all the more to provide for them. Look at this poor old woman! And then at once to Malagón. I tell you that all this made me laugh, and I have the courage for more. May God direct it all.
4. It may happen that before I finish in Salamanca, our document will arrive and I can come to you more leisurely. Someone else can take care of the matter in Malagón. There is no lack of suspicion -- and signs supporting it -- that perhaps the calced friars are pleased that I will be so far away and that his paternity will not regret my being far from the Incarnation. My attending to the needs of those monasteries will require time, and there won't be so much occasion for grumbling about my going out; I am not doing so for a mere trifle. May the Lord direct matters so that I may best serve him.
5. He says in the letter that I should take what he is now telling me as a sketch for a painting, for he first has to discuss everything with Fray Pedro Fernández. Until he does this no action can be taken. In the enclosed letter to the bishop he explains himself more clearly. He certainly desires to please him and indeed is so good he doesn't know how to say no.
6. He has approved of a college for discalced friars, but not the monastery for the nuns. And that not for his own reasons, but Fray Antonio de Jesús and the prior of La Roda thought that the foundation would not be opportune. I was delighted because I had refused many times on account of the eight beatas who are there. I would rather found four monasteries.
7. Padre Fray Pedro Fernández has insisted that we not found a monastery until we have our own province, even though he might give the license. And he gives good reasons -- they have written them down for me. For since the nuncio is so easily moved, and there are those who will talk about it to him, we could be harmed. Everything must be well thought out.
8. As for the Casilda matter, I am disappointed. It means that they won't give you anything. I tell you that all they had to do was give you the twenty-five hundred ducats they had mentioned, or at least two thousand. What use is all this uproar? Never has there been so much noise for so little ...
