For Madre María de San José, in the monastery of the discalced Carmelite nuns in Seville.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. I don't know how you can be silent for so long a time when at every moment I am wanting to hear how you are doing. I tell you I am not being silent here in what regards your house.
2. You should know that Padre Nicolao is here, for he is prior of Pastrana and came to see me. His visit was a wonderful consolation and I praised our Lord for having given our order a person like this, who is so virtuous. It seems His Majesty chose him as the means to set things right in your house, judging from the effort he has made and the cost to him. Pray much to our Lord for him, because you all owe this to him.
3. And, my daughter, set aside those foolish notions about perfection that lead you to refuse to be prioress again. We are all working and hoping to bring this about, and you come along with this childishness -- and there is no other name for it. This is a matter that pertains not just to you but to the whole order. It is so fitting for the service of God that I wish it were already done -- also for the honor of your house and that of our Padre Gracián. And even if you had no capacity for this office, no other solution would be suitable; even more so, since "for want of good men ..." as they say.
4. If God grants us this favor, just be silent and obey. Do not speak a word; think of how angry you will make me. What you have said is enough for letting us know that you do not want the office. And truly anyone who has such experience doesn't need to be told anything in order to understand that it is a heavy cross. God will help you; the storm has passed for now.
5. I very much want to know whether those nuns are aware of what they have done (or are they denying it in some way -- for I am worried about the state of their souls), and how they are getting along. For goodness' sake give me a long report about everything. If you send the letters to Roque de Huerta through the archbishop, they will be sent to where I am. Sister Isabel de San Pablo will write now about what is happening here, for I don't have time.
6. Give my regards to my daughter Blanca, with whom I am very pleased; I feel obliged to her father and mother for all they have done for you. Thank them for me. I assure you that what happened in your house is a story that frightens me, and I desire that you write telling me everything about it clearly and truthfully. Tell me now especially about how those two sisters are behaving; as I have said, I am very worried about them.
7. Give my regards to all the sisters and to Mother Vicaress. She can read this letter as though addressed to her. And I also send best wishes to my Gabriela. I haven't found out how Sister San Francisco behaved in all this business.
8. They are calling me now for Padre Nicolao, and tomorrow I am leaving for Valladolid; our Father Vicar General has sent me orders that I go there at once, and from there to Salamanca. There was little need for me in Valladolid, but this was requested by Doña María and the bishop. In Salamanca the need is great, for they are in that house which is very unhealthy, and they are undergoing much difficulty from the one who sold it to them. The trouble, the daily confrontations, and what they have undergone because of him is great, and this still goes on every day. Pray to our Lord that a good house can be bought at a low price. May His Majesty watch over you for me, my daughter, and allow me to see you before I die.
Today is 24 June.
9. I am leaving tomorrow. I am so busy that I cannot write to those daughters of mine. Let me know if they received a letter from me.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
