1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. I arrived here in Valladolid four days ago and feeling well, glory to God, and without fatigue, for the weather was very cool. It is something that frightens me, the delight that these nuns, as well as Lord and Lady de Mendoza, found in my being among them; I don't know why. All the nuns ask for your prayers. And the prioress here says you shouldn't write to her, that because she is so loquacious, she cannot carry on a conversation with the dumb. I found my María de San José to be very well and happy, and everyone happy with her. I was delighted to see her; and to see how all these houses are doing, considering the poverty in which they were founded. May the Lord be praised forever.
2. Now a postulant, very capable and talented, has received the habit here. Her patrimony is valued at twenty thousand ducats. But we don't think she will leave much to the house in comparison with what she could, for she is very attached to her blood sisters. Nonetheless the amount will be reasonable, and with what the prioress adds, little will be lacking for the nuns to have a sufficient income; and all want them to have one.
3. As for Paul going to Rome, it would be foolish, something that should not even be mentioned or allowed to pass through our minds. My greater fear is that if he is provincial, he will be required to go to the general chapter; for as far as the council goes, that father is very resolute, without giving any whys or wherefores. There is no need to speak of it, but to praise the Lord for having guided the negotiations in such a way that your going is not necessary. All we lack now is another trial to make up for those we've passed through! Not for even a moment would I want you to have this thought in your head.
4. Padre Nicolao was with me in Avila three or four days. I was very consoled that you now have someone with whom you can confer about matters in the Carmelite order and who can help you, for I am satisfied with him. I was very distressed to see you so alone in this order in all you had to do. Certainly, he has seemed to me to be wise and a good adviser, and a servant of God; although he doesn't have that charm and gentle manner that God has given Paul -- few there are to whom God gives so much together. But certainly he is a man of substance and very humble and penitent and honest, and he knows how to win the favor of others. He will clearly recognize Paul's worth and is determined to follow him in everything. He made me very happy. If Paul gets on well with him, as I believe he will, even if for no other reason than to make me happy, this will prove most beneficial, for they will be of one mind. And it will bring me the greatest relief. For every time I think of what you have suffered from those who should have helped you, I consider it to have been one of your greatest trials. So, mi padre, do not be distant with him; either I am very deceived or he will be most helpful to you in many areas. We spoke of a lot of things and projects. May it please the Lord that the time will come for carrying them out, and that this flock of the Virgin, which has cost Paul so much, may have some order put into it.
5. I praise our Lord for your good health. For goodness' sake I beg you as a favor to me to stay as little as possible in Alcalá during this heat. I don't know how long I will remain here, because I am concerned about Salamanca, although I enjoy being here. In all truth I cannot say that I am unhappy anywhere. I think I will try as hard as I can not to stay here longer than this month. I am afraid of some mishap in Salamanca, that a buyer might come along for the house offered to us. It is an excellent one, although expensive. But God will provide.
6. So as not to trouble you, I have never wanted to mention how difficult to bear is the licentiate Godoy's daughter in Alba.
I have done as much as I can so that everything be tried, but nothing works. Since she lacks intelligence, she doesn't reason things through. She must be most unhappy, for she will burst out in loud cries. She claims this is due to a heart ailment; I don't think so.
7. I had written to the prioress to write down some of the many things she says about her so that I may show it to the licentiate, and she wrote this, which I am enclosing. And afterward it seemed to me better that he not see it, but that he understand in a general way that she is not meant for us. This is painful for me because we owe him so much, but in no way would she be bearable.
8. Now I will be going there and will learn about everything, but I believe this will be of little benefit, for the things they have written me tell of someone who is without reason. Since she fears her father, she will be best off near him. I have not seen him yet. In a letter I received from him in Avila he asks that she remain in that house until he can find another way of helping her. And this we will allow. I always feared accepting her, surmising the pain he would feel if he saw she had to leave. Well, all that could be done has been done.
9. Best regards to Padre Fray Bartolomé. I was delighted with his letter. May he never tire of rendering me this kindness. I, instead, am so tired now from the visits of all the ladies who come to see me, that I am unable to write to him. Yesterday I had a visit with the Countess of Osorno. The Bishop of Palencia is here. You owe him much, and so do we all.
10. My regards to Father Rector. May the Lord watch over you and keep you in the holiness that I beg of him.
Today is 7 July.
Your paternity's true daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
