1. Jesus. The Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. And how rightly I can call you this. Although my love for you was great, it has now increased so much that it amazes me. And so I experience desires to see you and embrace you warmly. May God be praised, from whom comes every good; he has drawn you victoriously out of so ruthless a battle. I do not attribute this to your virtue but to the many prayers that have been offered in these houses up here for that house. May it please His Majesty that we may be worthy to thank him for the favor he has granted us.
2. Father Provincial sent me the letter from the sisters; and Padre Nicolao, yours. Thus I learned that you have been reinstated in your office, which for me was the greatest of consolations. Anything else would never have sufficed to put their souls at rest. Be patient. Since the Lord has given you so much desire to suffer, rejoice in its thus being satisfied. I well understand that it's no small trial. If we were to go around choosing the trials we want and setting aside others, we would not be imitating our Spouse, who after suffering so much in the garden from his Passion concluded: "Fiat voluntas tua." We need to do God's will always; let him do what he wants with us.
3. I asked Padre Nicolao to give you the advice that he thinks suitable, for he is very wise, and he knows you; so I submit to whatever he may write to you. I only ask you to have as little to do as possible with those who are not among our discalced friars (I mean you and the nuns in matters concerning your souls). Don't bother too much if at times the friars are not available. If communion is not received so frequently, you needn't be concerned. What is important is that we don't find ourselves in a situation like the one in the past. If a nun at times should want to consult some other friars, do not oppose it. I have so little time that I didn't think I would even be able to write to you.
4. My very best regards to all the nuns. On my part I thank them for the praiseworthy manner in which they conducted themselves. I also thank them for bringing me joy. May the Blessed Virgin reward them, bless them for me, and make them saints.
5. I don't believe you can refuse to accept Enrique Freire's eldest daughter, for much is owed to him. Do what Padre Nicolao tells you, to whom I submit. By no means would it be fitting to accept the youngest one now, both because of her age and because it isn't right that three sisters be together in one monastery -- all the more so in our monasteries where there are so few nuns. You can delay by saying she's too young; don't discourage them.
6. When you can begin repaying my brother, know that he has his needs, for he has had many expenses all together. You know well how obligated you are to him. Oh, how much he has suffered from your trials. May God give you the calm that is best suited to your pleasing him. Write to me at length about everything, especially about those two poor souls, for they have me very worried. Show them favor and strive if you can through means that seem right to you to get them to understand. I am leaving here on the day after the feast of St. Anne, God willing. I will be staying in Salamanca for some days. Your letters can be addressed to Roque de Huerta. All these sisters send their best regards to you and to all the nuns. You owe them very much.
7. These monasteries make one want to praise God on all counts. Pray to His Majesty for Malagón, and for the business for which I am going to Salamanca, and don't forget all those to whom we are indebted, especially those from recent times.
Today is the feast of the Magdalene.
8. There are so many things to do here that I still don't know how I have written this; it was done at intervals. For this reason I am not writing to Padre Fray Gregorio, for I thought of doing so. Write to him and give him my greetings and tell him I am happy that he played so important a role in this war, and that he will as a result share in the spoils. Tell me how our good father, the prior of Las Cuevas, is doing so that I can tell how I should write to him about these affairs.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
