To the most illustrious and reverend Don Teutonio de Braganza, Archbishop of Evora, my lord.
1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your most illustrious lordship, amen. Last week I wrote you a long letter and sent you the little book, and so I will not be lengthy. I am only writing because I forgot to ask you to have printed along with it the life of our Father St. Albert, which is in a little notebook enclosed with the other book. This would be a great consolation for all of our sisters since it now only exists in Latin. This translation was done by a father from the order of St. Dominic out of love for me. He is one of the most learned men around here and a real servant of God. He did not think this was meant to be printed, for he doesn't have, nor did he ask for, permission from his provincial. But if you are satisfied with it and have it printed, the other doesn't matter much.
2. In the letter I referred to, I give you an account of how well our affairs are coming along and how I received orders to go to Salamanca from here, where I think I plan to stay for a number of days. I will write to you from there.
3. For the love of our Lord do not fail to let me know how your health is, if for no other reason than as a remedy for the loneliness I will feel in not finding you there in Salamanca. And let me know if you have any news about peace in that place, for I am very distressed over what I am hearing around here. If, for my sins, this affair leads to war, I fear a terrible disaster in that kingdom, and that great harm will necessarily come to ours as well.
4. They tell me it is the Duke of Braganza who is fomenting it. And that he is actually a relative of yours pains me to the depths of my soul, apart from the many other reasons there are for such pain. For love of our Lord -- since in this regard you rightly have an important part to play in his lordship's decision -- strive to bring about an agreement. According to what I am told, our king is doing all he can, and this greatly justifies his cause. They must keep in mind the terrible harm that can result, as I said, and you should look to the honor of God without respect to any other thing, as I believe you will.
5. May it please His Majesty to put his hand to this task as we are all beseeching him, for I tell you I suffer so deeply from what is happening that if God were to permit so great an evil, I would rather die than see it.
6. May He keep you for many years in the holiness that I beg of him for you and for the good of the church, and give you so much grace that you will be able to work out a peaceful solution in his service.
7. Here everyone is saying that our king is in the right and that he has made every effort he can to find out. May the Lord give the light needed to understand the truth without the many deaths there would be by taking a risk. And in a time when Christians are so few it would be a great misfortune were they to start killing one another.
8. All these sisters, your servants whom you know, are well and in my opinion their souls are making good progress. All of them are being careful to pray for you. Although a wretched person, I do so always.
Today is the feast of the Magdalene.
From this house of the Conception of Our Lady of Mount Carmel in Valladolid.
Your illustrious lordship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
