To the very magnificent Señora Doña Isabel de Jimena, my lady.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your honor always and give you the grace to understand how much you owe the Lord. Despite dangers so dangerous as youth, wealth, and freedom, the Holy Spirit gives you light to want to leave them aside. And the things that usually frighten souls, such as penance, enclosure, and poverty, enabled you to understand their value and also the delusion and loss that would have been yours had you followed after the former dangers. May the Lord be blessed and praised forever.
2. This is the reason you have so easily persuaded me that you are very good and capable of being one of our Lady's daughters by entering her holy order. May it please God that you will advance so far in your holy desires and works that I won't have to complain of Padre Juan de León. He sent me information that left me so satisfied that I didn't need to know anything more. I am so consoled with the thought that you will become a great saint that I would be very satisfied in just having you without anything more.
3. May the Lord repay you for the alms you have resolved to give wherever you enter, for the amount is large. Doing this must be very consoling to you since you are doing what the Lord counsels -- to give yourself to him -- and what you have to the poor for love of him. Considering what you have received, I don't think you could have fulfilled your obligation with a smaller amount. Since you are doing all you can, your offering is no small matter nor will what you receive in return be small.
4. Since you have seen our constitutions and rule, I have nothing to say but that if you carry on with this decision you may enter at whatever time you settle on, and you may choose from among our houses the one you prefer. In all of this I want to please my Padre Juan de León, leaving the choice to you. Truly, I would have liked you to take the habit in the house where I am living, for I certainly desire to make your acquaintance. May our Lord direct everything for his greater service and glory, amen.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
