1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. Angela is still unable to put her suspicions entirely to rest. It is no wonder that she does not find relief in anything, nor does her will allow her any, and, from what she says, has many trials. Nature is weak, and so she feels disturbed when she sees she is being badly repaid. You should tell that gentleman, for goodness' sake, that although he is by nature careless, he should not be so with her. Where love is present, it cannot be asleep for so long a time.
2. This aside, I am sorry about the mental fatigue you are undergoing. For the love of God, cut down on your workload. If you do not attend to this in time, you will see later that you will not be able to find a remedy even though you may want to. Learn to be your own master, avoid extremes, and profit from the experience of others. This is how you serve God, and try to see the need we all have for you to be in good health. I greatly praise His Majesty at seeing the good results of our negotiations, for by his mercy we can consider them concluded. We have so much authority supporting us that it truly seems that it is God who has thus arranged matters. Apart from the essential thing, I am happy that you will see the fruit of your labors. I tell you that through them you certainly paid dearly for it. Your joy will be great when everything has calmed down and those who come after us receive the great benefit.
3. Oh, mi padre, how many trials this house costs me! And after everything was done, the devil so arranged things that we were left without it. And it was the house that was most suited for us in all Salamanca, and the owner profited by our presence. You cannot trust these sons of Adam. He was the one who made us the offer, one of those gentlemen who they say here is most honest, and all agreed that his word is as good as when put in writing. Not only did he give his word, but he signed an agreement before witnesses and brought the notary himself. Later he nullified the contract. Everyone is amazed, except those other gentlemen who urged him to do this for their own or their relatives' profit. And they were able to influence him more than those who tried to reason with him. And a brother of his spoke with us in great charity, and he is very disturbed over the matter. We have recommended all this to our Lord. This must be what is best for us. My regret is that I find nothing else of worth for us in Salamanca.
4. In fact, if these sisters had the house that the sisters in Seville have, they would think they were in heaven. I regret the foolishness of that prioress, and she has lost much credit in my eyes. I fear that the devil has begun to meddle in that house and wants to destroy it completely. I tell you that if this lady, whose letter made me happy (I mean the one you sent me through Señora Doña Juana), meets with your satisfaction -- they told me down there that she is admirable -- I want to please her and receive her there when God wills that someone be there to do so. For I observe in that house a greed that I cannot bear. The prioress is shrewder than her state requires. So I fear that she is deceiving us; and, as I told her, she has never been open with me. She has a lot of the Andalusian in her. I tell you, I had to suffer a lot from her when there. Since she has often written to me with great repentance, I thought she had made amends, which seemed evident. To put it into the poor nuns' heads that the house is unhealthy is sufficient for them to think they are getting sick. I have written terrible letters to her, but I might as well be trying to make a dent in iron. You can see for yourself from this letter that Padre Nicolao has now written me.
5. For the love of God if you think you can influence her, write to her through some other friar. I think it would suit us well if we sent some other nuns there who would carry more weight and deal with such serious business matters in a befitting way. Tell Padre Nicolao to write to the prior at once, so as not to allow her to speak any more of this, for he must bear much of the blame for what is happening. I certainly think it is wrong to allege that the house is the cause for one's being sick. But it will be unhealthy for the nuns to live where they have well-water, as they state, and not have the refreshing views of flowing water, as they do where they are now, the best views you can find in that area. The nuns here envy them. May God provide the remedy.
6. Padre Nicolao gave me your regards, but I would not want you to forget to recommend me to our Lord in your prayers; you have so much to do that you could forget. My health is fairly good. The prioress and sisters here send their best regards. May God watch over you and allow me to see you. It is past three o'clock, and I haven't recited Prime.
Today is the feast of St. Francis.
Your unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
