1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor and make you as holy as I beseech of him each day. I received your two letters through Father Prior of La Roda. One of them must have reached me when I was in Toledo.
2. I praise our Lord to see the desire you have to leave the world, for such disillusionment with it cannot come but from above. So I hope in God's divine mercy that you will render him truly genuine service responding to such good desires with the works of a true daughter of the Blessed Virgin, our Lady and Patroness. Certainly I would not want to impede for one day so great a call. I desire to explain to you in complete openness the intention I have in this matter, for you are already our sister and my lady.
3. You should know that several years ago many persons implored me to found a monastery in Madrid. Because of the great weariness I experienced with some ladies there during my eight-day stay on my way to Pastrana, I refused. Now, since we have had so many trials and I see the benefit that could come to the other monasteries by our having a foundation there, I am convinced this should be done. But there is a great obstacle, for they assure me that the archbishop will not give the license unless the house is founded with an income. And although there are some persons who could give a good one and have been desiring to do this for years, they are not free to give anything before they enter. And since your honor is able to help very much in this matter, it seems to Padre Nicolao and me that you should wait for some days. With God's help, I don't think the delay would be longer than you say.
4. Pray about this, and if you think otherwise, feel free to let me know, and you can enter when your wish. But that would put in danger a foundation in Madrid, and if you might be the means through which such a great work could be accomplished, I would consider this something wonderful. May our Lord do what is for his greater glory.
5. Father Prior came so late that I wasn't able to speak to him much about this matter. Tomorrow I will do so and tell you in this letter his opinion. Since I will be very busy with a matter that he will tell you about himself, I am writing tonight. I am fairly well, glory to God, although I arrived tired; and all that I found here was enough to tire me more. May His Majesty be served by this, and keep you for many years that you may employ them in the service of this our great God and Lord.
6. I beseech you to give my best regards to Padre Valentín. Each day I recommend him to His majesty and beg him to repay me. Even if he does so in a small way, I will be well rewarded, wretched as I am.
Today is 3 December.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
7. Note that what I have said here is for you alone. I don't ever remember having said so much about it.
8. Truly, we did speak a long time today concerning your situation, about which I have nothing else to add. I was very much consoled by his reverence's presence. He will tell you about everything, and inform me about what you and he agree on, which I am certain will be for the best.
