For mi padre Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián de la Madre de Dios, Alcalá.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. You should know that I was already in Malagón when they gave me Paul's letter. So, it wasn't possible for me to stay longer in Toledo as he ordered me in the letter. This worked out better, for on the feast of the Immaculate Conception these sisters moved to the new house. I had already been here for eight days, which were no less burdensome than those spent in travel, for there was much to be done so that the move could be made on that special day. I got very tired; nonetheless I am feeling better than usual.
2. I am sorry about the trouble you had; there is nothing more I can do. The move took place with much rejoicing, for they came in procession with the Most Blessed Sacrament from the other house. The nuns were very happy; they seemed like little lizards that come out into the sun in summer. Certainly they suffered a lot there; and even though nothing is finished except eleven cells, they could go on living here for many years even if nothing more were done.
3. Oh, mi padre, how necessary was my coming here, whether for this move -- it doesn't seem they would have been able to make it so quickly -- or for the rest of the things. God could have done it, but I don't know now what other means could have been used there to break this spell. The nuns have come to understand how foolishly they were behaving. The more I learn about the way they were governed by the one who was presiding here, the more convinced I become of how reckless it would be to put her in any position of government. This poor licentiate seems to me to be a great servant of God, and I believe it is he who is less at fault. That other person deserves all the blame, for she kept him on the go constantly with her noisy restlessness. He is in complete accord with all that I tell you should be done here, and he is so humble and sorry for any fault he might have had for what happened that I was very edified.
4. Paul and I are much to blame. Tell him to confess this, for I have already done so. We gave too much leeway in some matters and should not have trusted so much in young people, however holy, not at all.Since they don't have experience, with good intentions, they cause great havoc. It is necessary, mi padre, that we keep this in mind for the future. I hope in our Lord that all will go well now. The prioress we brought is very God-fearing and wise, and has so good a knack for governing that all have grown to love her greatly. She urgently asks for your prayers. She is very much your daughter. I don't think anyone else could have been chosen who is so apt for this house. Please God she will always be so, for it seemed the other one would do very well.
5. It's a terrible thing, the harm that a prioress can cause in one of these houses. Even though the nuns see things that scandalize them -- which they often did in this case -- they think they should not judge badly, that it would be against obedience. I tell you, mi padre, the one who makes a visitation must proceed very carefully so that the devil doesn't use some small things to cause much harm.
6. May God have Fray Germán with him in heaven; he had good qualities, but he did not have the talent to understand better the nature of perfection. Our Lord is acting in such a way that it seems he does not want some things to be concealed. Please God that I am not at fault for having insisted so much on bringing a confessor here with me -- that is, Fray Felipe -- or Fray Germán for having opposed me in this. Since Father Vicar finally did what I wanted, Fray Germán was so displeased that he told someone who went to see him that he was sick in bed because of me. But in my opinion I would have been doing nothing had I arrived without a confessor, and there wasn't any other. Nonetheless, I have become fearful lest I committed some fault. Write to me what you think, for there is no one I ask who satisfies me.
7. Through Padre Fray Gabriel, I wrote the other day to Father Rector there so that you might receive some news about me. I did not dare write to you, although I truly believe I could have. This father came here, but I cannot understand his purpose for doing so, although he spoke about the project of a monastery in Villanueva. Now that I have been well informed about it, I think it would be the most foolish thing in the world to agree to it. And Padre Fray Antonio de Jesús has got it into his head that the foundation should be made. I made a strong appeal to their conscience. I don't know what they will do.
8. He also was attending to the matter of Doña Isabel de Osorio, the sister of the one he placed in Toledo. But Doña Isabel and I and Nicolao had already dealt with this matter. He seemed better than usual, but he is so simple about some things that I was amazed.
9. With regard to his being definitor, according to what Father Vicar writes to me, the purpose was to honor the discalced friars; at least he gives that impression. I don't know what harm can come to them for doing this or if he can be blamed for their having elected him. They are keeping this election very secret. Don Luis Manrique told him that the documents were already sent to Rome. I asked him if they were sending them to the chapter. He answered that since the king was a petitioner they would not do that. He didn't stay more than a day, for he had thought I was in Toledo; and since he didn't find me there, he came here.
10. I am amused by Paul's pride. It's about time! Have no fear that I am saddened by that or think that it causes him harm. That would be most foolish -- which he is not -- unless one recalls this waterwheel with its buckets that are as quickly filled as emptied. I well remember the journey from Toledo to Avila with him, how nice it was and without my suffering any illness. Happiness is a great thing, and it seems his letter has now brought me relief from my work. Thank him for me.
11. I don't think I will be able to stay here all of January, even though this place is not a bad one for me, for there are not so many letters or so much to attend to. Father Vicar is so eager for a foundation in Arenas and that we meet there that I believe he will give me orders to finish up quickly here, and truth to say most of the things are done. You wouldn't believe all that I owe him. He treats me with the utmost kindness. I tell you that I remain very much obliged to him, even though his office is coming to an end.
12. Read the enclosed letter from the good Velasco. Be careful about speaking of this if his sister does not have a genuine desire and is not suited (for I would be very sorry if something unpleasant happened, since I like him very much); nor should you say anything about where she might enter. I believe that to him, to Padre Maestro Fray Pedro Fernández, and to Don Luis we owe all the favor now being shown to us.
13. May God show you this favor, mi padre, as I beseech him and keep you for many years, amen, amen.
Today is 12 December.
May God grant you a blessed Christmas with the increase in holiness I desire for you.
Your paternity's true daughter and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
