1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. I recently wrote you a long letter by way of Toledo, and so now I will be brief. Also they told me late that the one bringing this letter, who is the brother-in-law of Antonio Ruiz, is leaving before dawn. I would really have wanted a letter from you, even though without one I was happy to receive the news of your health and of the good you are doing in that place through your preaching. He told me of your sermon on the feast of San Eugenio. May God be praised from whom comes all good. He grants a great favor to anyone he selects as a means to bring benefit to souls.
2. I forgot to mention how Ana de Jesús is doing very well; and the other nuns, it appears, are content and at peace. I do not allow that person to speak to or confess any of the nuns. As for the rest, I show him much kindness, which is necessary, and I often speak with him.
3. Today he preached for us, and he is certainly a good man and he wouldn't maliciously do any harm to anyone. But I am convinced that it is better for the nuns in these monasteries to speak little with others, even if these others are holy, for God will teach the nuns. And unless the teaching is given from the pulpit, a great deal of conversation, even if it is with Paul, is not beneficial; rather it is harmful, however good the topic. It causes such persons to lose some of the credibility that with good reason they should enjoy.
4. Oh, mi padre, what grief I have undergone at times over this. And how I remember during these days what a letter from you made me suffer on Christmas night a year ago. May God be praised who now gives us better times. Certainly it was a night that were I to live many years I would not forget.
5. I am no worse than usual; rather I am feeling healthier these days. We are doing well in the new house. It will be a very good one if it gets finished. But even now, there is plenty of living space. The prioress and all the sisters recommend themselves much to your prayers, and I to those of Father Rector. It is already night, so I'll say no more except that it would be a very blessed Christmas for me if I could hear the sermons you will be preaching for the occasion. May God give you a blessed Christmas and many others as I desire.
Today is the feast of Our Lady of the "O," and I am your paternity's daughter and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
