1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. Today, the feast of St. Thomas, Serrano arrived. I welcomed your letter, for I wanted to know if you had a good trip. May God be blessed who grants us so much favor. May it please him to grant you the same on your return, which you will not undertake very willingly. A willing spirit helps to lessen the burden of it.
2. I thought your reverence would have received two of my letters; at least one, for I wrote it as soon as I arrived here, which was the feast of St. Catherine. I sent both to Señor Francisco Doria.
3. On the feast of the Immaculate Conception, God was pleased that we move into the new house; although the move cost me a great deal of work, for much had to be done on it before we could move in. And so I remained here eight days before the nuns came, and got very tired. But I considered it all well worth it, for even though much still needs to be done, the sisters are settled in very well. The rest the Lord has done in a way better than I deserve.
4. I am amazed at the havoc the devil works through bad government and at the fear, or deception, he inculcated in these nuns, for, they are all good and desirous of perfection. And in what they saw was wrong, most or almost all of them felt an uneasiness, but didn't know how to correct it. Now they are truly freed from deception, and I firmly believe that there isn't one of them who would want anything else than what she has now, not even Brianda's sister, for Brianda was delighted not to have to come here.
5. I tell you, mi padre, it is necessary to be careful about who is given these offices, for the nuns are so submissive that their greatest disturbance came from the scruple they felt over judging their prioress to be doing something bad, and in itself what she was doing was not good. They are most happy with their present prioress, and they are right in being so. What two or three must have regretted was the removal of the confessor, for the others -- I think all the rest of them -- were delighted. I immediately told them that we didn't bring the permission for him to be the confessor of any of us. All the others, to repeat, were delighted. I tried to do everything secretly but spoke with him very clearly. And I truly think he is a soul of God and that there wasn't any malice in him. Since we live far away from him and he has much to do, what I did was done without attracting any notice. And I arranged to have him preach to us, and I see him sometimes. Everything has now been cleared up, glory to God.
6. What I regret are the many debts they have. Everything is in ruin, since they have had such bad government for so long. They well understood what would happen, but she didn't give them an account of anything. Since she had been a nun for so short a time, she couldn't have known more. This resolve to trust only in one's own opinion does great harm.
7. Advise the one who is now going to begin again so that she understand well her obligations according to the observance of the order's directives and the constitutions, for in such observance they cannot err. When they do otherwise, God wants their very closest friends to be their accusers. And they shouldn't think they can do and undo whatever they want as married people. And show her this letter. Sometimes I get angry with her and the rest of them that I brought from up here, since they never informed me of anything, although at first not much happened compared to what took place later.
8. If a nun wants to confess with someone other than the ordinary confessor, designate someone to give this permission, as long as the confessor be a friar of your choice from Los Remedios. Even in this respect they suffered great torment here. They are souls who have suffered many things hard to digest.
9. I've been told that the nuns there wrote to the nuns here urging them to ask for Brianda, for since they succeeded there in having the prioress they wanted, they thought the nuns here could as well. Give the prioress a good penance, for she should have known that I am not so bad a Christian as to insist so much on something without serious reasons and that I would not have gone to such expense in buying the house without it being necessary. I pardon them for the judgments they must have made in this regard. May God pardon them. May it please God that if I should see that this prioress would not be bad for them that I would try to bring her back as I did for their prioress. I tell you that if she were to return, the peace of this house would be completely destroyed, aside from all the rest. In so serious a matter one ought not speak from afar against the deeds of someone who would give up her own rest for the good and tranquility of another soul.
10. I learned some days ago that the friars in Pastrana were sick. I haven't learned anything more. They must be well now. Don't be disturbed, nor for this fail to do what needs to be done down there, although whatever is not finished by the Feast of Epiphany will require much prudence. For the response from Rome, if God gives it to us, will require that you be back here on time.
11. Before the feast of the Immaculate Conception, Fray Gabriel, the prior of La Roda, came to see me. He indicated to me that he came for the matter concerning Doña Isabel Osorio. I asked him to wait until we know whether what she brings would help the foundation in Madrid, for Doña Luisa told me that the archbishop would not give his permission unless the foundation were to have an income, and I don't know how it can have one even if she gives everything she has. Someone would have to advance us the amount knowing for certain what she will give. For she can't do anything before her entry. We will speak about it here.
12. The secret that was kept about sending a message to Rome pleased me. He told me that it was already gone and that Don Luis was the one who had informed him. He's convinced that with the king asking for it, the permission will come quickly and that they will not wait for the chapter. Please God this will be so. I let on that this was all news to me. He says he is delighted, and he has every reason to be. The rest must wait until we see each other.
13. The prioress in Beas has sent me letters for Casademonte. She is asking him to decide where he wants her to send the one hundred ducats that she has there. So you need not be concerned about this.
14. What you tell me about the archbishop is a great consolation. You are very wrong not to give him my best regards. Give them to him now. You can tell him that I pray to the Lord for him each day particularly at communion time.
15. May His Majesty protect you and bring you here in good health, and do not fear that I will let you leave so quickly.
The prioress sends you her regards. Among the others, some are looking forward to your coming.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
16. Padre Fray Felipe is doing well. Best regards to Padre Fray Gregorio from me and his sister; she is very good and cannot contain her happiness. It would be appropriate for the prioress to be the mistress of novices, lest their love be divided and not centered on the prioress, since there have been so many changes. She could have someone help her instruct them. And in regard to interior matters about their prayer and temptations, inform her that she should not ask for more than what they willingly tell her (as is stated in the document you had others sign); this is important. I am delighted that Father Prior of Las Cuevas is satisfied. Truth is a great thing. Give him my regards.
