1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. In Padre Fray Nicolao's letter, I enlarged on some things that I will not mention here because you will be seeing them. Your recent letter is so kind and humble that it deserves a long response. But you want me to write to the good Rodrigo Alvarez, and so I am doing that and don't have the head for much more. Serrano says he will give these letters to the one who will deliver them to their destination. Please God this will be so. I was happy to see him and regret that he must leave. I am so grateful to him for what he has done in a time of such need that you didn't have to remind me. I will try to get him to return there, for it is very important for us to have someone we can trust in that region.
2. Here my health is not as bad as it is in other places. I felt sorry over your poor health, about which Sister Gabriela wrote me. The trials were so great that even if you had a heart of stone, they would have done you harm. I would not have wanted to contribute to them. Please pardon me, for with those I truly love I am unbearable, for I wouldn't want them to err in anything. The same happened with Madre Brianda to whom I wrote terrible letters, but they did little good.
3. Certainly, in a way, I consider that what the devil contrived in this house was worse than what happened there in Seville. For one thing, it lasted longer, and for another the scandal was much more damaging to outsiders, and I don't know whether the community will be left as unharmed; although a remedy has been found for the disquiet inside. The Lord has smoothed things over. May he be blessed, for the nuns are not much to blame. The one with whom I am more annoyed has been Beatriz de Jesús, for she has never said a word to me, not even now on seeing that all the nuns are telling me about it and that I am aware of everything. This has seemed to me to be a sign of very little virtue or discretion. She must think she is being loyal to a friendship; but in truth she is very attached to herself, for true friendship does not show itself by hiding what, if revealed, could have provided a remedy without so much harm.
4. For the love of God be on guard against doing anything that if known could cause scandal. Let us free ourselves from these good intentions that cost us so dearly. And don't say anything to anyone about this father from the Society eating there, not even to our own discalced friars. For if they know, the devil, being what he is, will stir up a fuss about it. Don't think that it cost me little for the rector to become gentler -- and here they all have become so -- for I tried hard even to the point of writing to Rome from where I believe the remedy has come.
5. I am most grateful to that saintly Rodrigo Alvarez for what he does and to Padre Soto. Give him my regards and tell him that I think he is more of a friend through deeds than through words, for he has never written to me or even sent greetings.
6. I don't know why you say that Padre Fray Nicolao has turned me against you, for you have no greater defender on earth. He was telling me the truth so that by being informed of the damage done in that house I would not be deceived. Oh, my daughter, how useless it is to excuse yourself so much in what regards me! I tell you truly, I don't care whether they pay any attention to me or not if I know they are striving to do what they are obliged to do. The mistake comes from the fact that since with so much care and love I think I am looking out for what concerns the nuns, it seems to me that they won't do what they ought if they don't pay attention to me and that I have tired myself in vain. And this is what got me annoyed, to the extent that I wanted to abandon the whole thing, thinking, as I say, I was doing no good, as is true. But my love is so great that as soon as I see some little fruit I am unable to give up, and so there is no more to say about this.
7. Serrano has told me that a nun has now been accepted and that according to the number of nuns he thinks there are in the house -- he tells me twenty -- the number is complete. If it is, no one can give permission for her to be accepted, for Father Vicar can do nothing against the acts of the apostolic visitators. Consider carefully, for the love of God, that you would be amazed at the harm that comes to these houses from there being many nuns, even though there may be an income and enough food. I don't know why you pay so much interest every year since you have the means of freeing yourself of this obligation. I was delighted over what is coming from the Indies. May God be praised.
8. As for what you say about the subprioress, since your health is so poor and you cannot keep up with the choir observance, you need someone who knows it very well. That Gabriela seems so young matters little. She has been a nun for a long while, and her virtues are what matter. If in speaking with outsiders she is deficient, San Francisco can accompany her. At least she is obedient and will not stray from what you wish. And she is healthy -- since it is necessary that she not be missing from choir -- and San Jerónimo is not. In conscience, she is the one I think most suited. And since she was in charge of the choir during the time of that miserable vicaress, they will have seen that she did well and more willingly give her their vote; and for a subprioress, you look more to one's ability than to one's age.
9. I am writing to the prior of Pastrana about the mistress of novices since what you say seems good to me. I would like the novices to be few in number, for a large number of nuns, as I said, is in every respect, a great drawback, and there is no other reason than this for houses to come to ruin.
10. I would greatly desire -- since down there you have the means to help the order in its needs -- that from what is in Toledo you gradually reimburse my brother. He is truly in need, in such a way that he has had to borrow in order to pay the five hundred ducats each year for the property he bought; and now he has sold objects that in Seville would be worth a thousand ducats. He has mentioned this to me at times, and I see that he is right. Although you don't do so all at once, you can pay something; see what you can do.
11. The alms of bread that the prior of Las Cuevas gives is great. If this house here had as much they could get along well, for I don't know what they will do. They have done nothing but take in nuns without dowries. As for what you say about Portugal, the archbishop is in a hurry. I am thinking of taking my time about going there. If I can, I will write to him now. Will you see that the letter leaves at once and in a safe manner.
12. Regarding the repentance of Beatriz, I would like her, for the good of her soul, to retract what she said to Garciálvarez. But I have a great fear that she doesn't know herself; only God can bring this about.
13. May he make you as holy as I beg of him and watch over you for me. However wretched you are, I would like to have some more like you, for I wouldn't know what to do if I had to make a foundation now. I don't find any prospective prioresses, although there might be some. Yet because these lack experience and I see what has gone on here, I have become very fearful, knowing that the devil can make use of good intentions to carry out his own works. So it is necessary to walk always with fear clinging to God and with little trust in our own opinions. However good they may be, if this care is not present, God will abandon us, and we will make a mistake in the very thing we were more sure of.
14. You can learn from what happened in this house, since you have already heard about it. I tell you that certainly the devil was planning an assault and that I was frightened by some of the things you wrote and gave importance to. Where was your good sense? And then San Francisco! Oh, God help me, the foolishness contained in that letter, and all so as to achieve your goal! May the Lord give us light, for without that light there is no virtue but only the ability to do wrong.
15. I am happy that you are so disillusioned, for this will help you with many things. In order to succeed it is beneficial to have erred, for in that way you acquire experience.
May God watch over you, for I did not think I could go on at such length.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
The prioress and the sisters send their best regards.
