To the very magnificent Señor Alonso Alvarez Ramírez, my lord.
1. Jesus be with your honor. If I had as much time at my disposal as you, I wouldn't be negligent about writing, as you are. But I do not neglect to recommend you to the Lord. Since I have learned about your health from other sources, I can bear with your silence. May our Lord grant you health, as is in his power and as I desire, so that you and Señor Diego Ortiz and Señora Francisca Ramírez may rejoice in that most precious work, which as I am told, is now the church with its chaplains. May God be praised forever.
2. I rejoiced over the pleasant manner in which our most Reverend General brought the matter to a conclusion. He is a wise and holy man. May God preserve him. His Majesty knows how willingly I would have remained in our monastery in Toledo. Ever since I left it, I tell you that I have not had a day without heavy trials. Two monasteries have been founded, glory to God, and this house is the smaller one. May it please His Majesty that it be of some service to him.
3. I don't know why the body of Señor Martín Ramírez -- may he be in glory as I desire and beg the Lord -- has not been transferred. I beg you to let me know why, and if any progress has been made in the project you once mentioned to me. O Lord! How often have I remembered you in the business affairs that have arisen here and how many times I have asked for blessings on you. For it was enough to say something once to you all, even in jest, for something to get done. May our Lord keep you for many years and allow me to enjoy your presence, for I certainly love you in the Lord.
4. It would be good if Señor Diego Ortiz were to write to me now and then. When you do not want to write, tell him to write for you. I kiss your hands many times and those of Señora Francisca Ramírez; and my regards to our little angels. May our Lord guard them, especially our patron, and may he keep you in his hands and give you all of the good I beseech him to bestow on you, amen.
Today is 5 February.
5. I forgot to mention that Juan de Ovalle and my sister kiss your hands. Juan de Ovalle never finishes speaking of what he owes you; and what must I owe!
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
6. About the favor you have done me in lavishing so much attention on Isabel de San Pablo, I am saying nothing. I owe you so much in return that I am leaving it to the Lord to thank and repay you. You have done a great charity. May the Lord be blessed for everything. Tell Señor Diego Ortiz that I beg him not to fail to place my lord St. Joseph at the door of the church.
