To mi padre, Fray Nicolao de Jesús María, prior of Pastrana, Seville.
1. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. Three or four days ago I received your letter dated 30 December, and previously I had received the ones Serrano brought. I answered you at length and also Mother Prioress, and I also wrote to Padre Rodrigo Alvarez. I gave these letters to Serrano and he attended to them, and afterward they told me that the letters were certainly given to the carrier. Apart from those, after I arrived here, I wrote you two other times and sent the letters to Señor Oria to send to you. Truly, I was disappointed to see that they were all lost. Please God that won't happen to this one, for I am sending it through Velasco.
2. You submit in everything to the Mother Prioress there, but she doesn't say a word to me. Since she is well, I believe that she will establish good order in everything else, especially with such a steward. What doesn't loving God bring about, since that steward wants to favor those poor souls! I earnestly beg him for prayers. Why don't you tell me anything about our Lucrecia? Give her my warmest greetings.
3. Before I forget, the prioress of Beas informed Casademonte in a message that she had the one hundred ducats and asked where he wanted her to send them. He said Madrid. I have already written you about this. So there's no need to worry about it.
4. You should realize that this place is so out of the way that you cannot count on my informing you of anything, as if I were in Seville, where I would be able to do much better; and even were I to send letters through Toledo, there are few messengers who go there; and these letters I also find get lost. I say this because you ask me to let you know when it will be necessary for you to come and about what is happening.
5. I informed Velasco not to count on me as long as I am here. And if you stay in Seville a long while, it could happen that you will not find me here, for I think the foundation of nuns in Villanueva -- which is near La Roda -- will be made and that it will be possible for me to go with the nuns. For if anywhere there is need of my presence, it's there. Padre Fray Antonio and the prior have been making such a fuss about this and insisting that it is the least we can do, our Lord must want it. I still don't know for certain; but if it is to be, I will leave before Lent. I regret not speaking with you, for I thought I would have that relief in Malagón.
6. My health is good, and, as for this house, everything is going so well that I cannot thank God enough for my having come. Spiritually, the community is doing very well and with much peace and contentment; in temporal matters it is improving, for it was a lost cause. May God be blessed for everything.
7. What you say about the most Reverend vicar general pleased me so much that I wanted to see it already done, and so I wrote about it to Velasco and to the caveman. I have only pointed out that there should be no doubt concerning the validity of this substitution, for when the nuncio died there were various opinions as to whether the commission he had given to Padre Gracián was still valid or not, and we are tired of conflicts. And so, whether yes or no, it would be good -- if God grants us the grace of a good outcome -- to hurry to do what is fitting while the person this mainly concerns is still alive. All the reasons you give me seem to be very good, and go beyond what I understand. So, we must not delay in this.
8. If you remain down there, we could be left in need of you if everything doesn't go according to our plan. I am writing this to Velasco and will submit to his opinion. In this regard, if it were not for the hardship it would cause you, since it is not easy to come up here so quickly, I would consider it preferable that you come, even though you would then have to go back down there. Although it is true that if Velasco is in Madrid, your presence might not be needed -- and I wrote this to him -- it is very important that the two of you be able to discuss things together. Something could happen in which your absence would result in serious harm, or at least in your being very sorry you weren't there, even though our friends love us very much. And even though our Padre Gracián is free, it would not be appropriate for him to become involved in these matters; if afterward our plan is realized, they will say that he was acting in his own interests. And although this does not matter much, it is good to avoid being the occasion for such judgments.
9. I have thought that if the caveman is not to be provincial and if he is given that other office, it would be good to elect Fray Antonio de Jesús. He has been chosen for the office before and will certainly do well if he has a superior over him -- he demonstrated this when the one from Salamanca entrusted that task to him -- and especially if he has a good companion. And we would be putting an end to this temptation and also to this little clique -- if there is one -- for that would be a much greater evil than any deficiency there might be should he become provincial. I say this now because I don't know when I will be able to write you again, considering the ill-fortune these letters can run into. I have recommended the greatest care with this one.
10. I would like to know how this discord that has now arisen began. Please God they will put an end to it down there. And may he watch over you. I am tired, for I have written much. Although my health is better here than it usually was when I was down there, my head never leaves me alone.
11. If the prior of Almodóvar is there, give him my best regards and tell him I am doing much for his friends. From each one I have accepted a nun, and please God he will be grateful to me. One was sent by Juan Vasquez; and the one who left Beas, by Cantalapiedra. I am told his reverence has a very good opinion of her.
12. The prioress asks for your prayers. All the nuns, especially myself, recommend you to our Lord, for I never forget you. I don't fail to have some suspicion that you would be delighted with any opportunity there is for you to remain in Seville. If it is a rash judgment, may God forgive me. May His Majesty make you very holy and keep you for many years, amen.
Today is 13 January.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
