1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with you, my sisters and daughters. I was greatly consoled by the lines you wrote and would like to respond to each one at length. But my duties prevent me from finding the time to do this. So may you pardon me and accept my good will. It would be a great consolation for me to know those who have made profession and those who have just entered. Congratulations to you in being espoused to so great a King. May it please His Majesty to make you the kind of nuns I both desire and beg of him so that in that eternity that has no end you may rejoice with him.
2. To Sister Jerónima, who signed her name as "dungheap," I say, please God this humility will amount to more than words; and to Sister Gabriela, that I received the St. Paul, which was very beautiful and in being so small resembled her and pleased me very much. I hope God will make her large in her obedience. In truth it seems His Majesty wants to make you all better than the nuns here -- since he has given you such great trials -- unless you lose out through your own fault. May he be praised for everything, especially for the good choice made in your elections. It has been a great consolation for me.
3. Here we find through experience that the Lord seems to give the first superior he appoints for a foundation more help and more love for the benefit of the house and of the sisters than to those who come afterward, and so they succeed in helping souls make progress. In my opinion, as long as there is nothing seriously wrong in the conduct of the one who is the first superior in these houses, she should not be changed, for there are more disadvantages in this than the nuns may suppose. May the Lord enlighten you that you may be certain of doing his will in everything, amen.
4. I beg Sister Beatriz de la Madre de Dios and Sister Margarita to do what previously I asked of all the nuns, that they no longer speak of the things of the past except to our Lord, or with their confessor. If they were deceived in some way, giving out information without that simplicity and charity we are obliged to by God, they should make every effort to return to speaking clearly and truthfully. Where satisfaction is called for, they should render it; if they don't, they will go about disturbed; the devil will not stop tempting them.
5. Let them just please the Lord; there is no reason to pay any more attention to the matter. The devil has gone about in a very angry way, seeking to prevent those holy beginnings from going forward. There is no basis for being surprised except by all the great harm that he has not caused everywhere. Often the Lord allows a fall so that the soul will be more humble, and when it returns to the right way of acting and grows in self-knowledge, it advances further in the service of our Lord, as we see among many saints. So, my daughters, you are all daughters and sisters of the Blessed Virgin and should try to love one another and take care to behave as though nothing happened. I am speaking to each one of you.
6. I have taken particular care to pray to the Lord for those who think I am angry with them. Certainly, I was saddened, but I will be more so if they don't do what I am saying here, which I beg them to do for the love of our Lord. I always keep my dear Sister Juana de la Cruz very much in mind. I imagine she is continually gaining merit. And since she has taken the title "of the Cross," she has received a good share of it. May she pray to our Lord for me and believe that it was neither on account of her sins nor mine, which are much greater, that he imposed this penance on all the nuns.
7. I ask the same of all of you, not to forget me in your prayers, for you owe me more than do the nuns here.
May our Lord make you as holy as I desire, amen.
Your servant,
Teresa of Jesus
