For Mother Prioress of San José in Seville, Carmelite.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. Today, on the vigil of Our Lady of the Transfiguration, I received your letter and the ones from those sisters of mine. I was most delighted. I don't know why it is that despite all the displeasure you cause me I cannot help but love you much. I soon get over it all. And now since your house has gained through the suffering of those conflicts, I love you more. Praise God, for everything turned out so well, and you must be somewhat better, for the nuns no longer shed tears over you as they usually do.
2. To wear the tunic in summer is foolish. If you want to please me, take if off when this letter arrives however great a means of mortification it is. Since all the sisters know of your need, they will not be disedified. You will be fulfilling your duty before the Lord, since you are doing this for me. And don't do anything else, for I have experienced the heat there. And it is better for the nuns to be able to attend the community acts than for them all to be sick. What I say to you applies also to any others you see have a need.
3. I have given praise to our Lord that the election went so well, for they say that when it goes like this the Holy Spirit is intervening. Rejoice in this suffering and don't allow the devil to disturb you with unhappiness over the office. It's funny that you now say you would be delighted to know I am praying for you. It has been a year since not only I but all the monasteries at my request have been doing so, and this is why perhaps everything has gone so well. May it please His Majesty to continue his work.
4. I already knew that with the arrival of Padre Fray Nicolao everything would be done very well. But a little before your request for him and before he received orders to leave, you were spoiling everything for us. For you were looking out only for your own house, and he was busy with the affairs of the whole order, which depended on him. God has provided in accord with who he is. I would have liked Fray Nicolao to be there and also here until I saw a final conclusion to a matter so important. I would have greatly desired that he come at a time when we could have talked. Now this cannot be, for you know that five days ago Father Vicar sent a patent letter for me to go to Villanueva de la Jara, which is near La Roda, to found a monastery. For almost four years, both the city council from there and other persons, especially the inquisitor of Cuenca, who is there as public prosecutor, have been pressing us to do so. I was finding many reasons against making the foundation. Padre Fray Antonio de Jesús and the prior of La Roda went there. The promoters of the foundation so insisted that they got what they wanted. The distance is twenty-eight leagues from here.
5. I would consider it a very fortunate thing if I could go by way of Seville so as to see you and satisfy my desire to argue with you; or, to put it better, to speak with you, for now after the trials you've gone through you must have become more mature. I have to return here before Easter, God willing, for my permission lasts only until the feast of St. Joseph. Tell Father Prior so that if that place is on his way he can stop to see me.
6. I have written to him by way of Madrid, and I would have written to him, and to you, more often, but since I thought the letters would be lost, I didn't dare. I am delighted that mine were not lost because in one of them I wrote what I thought about the choice of a subprioress, although you know better than I what is fitting for your house. But I tell you it is absurd to have both a prioress and a subprioress with poor health, just as it would be also to have a subprioress who cannot read well or preside over the choir, something contrary to the constitutions. Who is preventing you when you are occupied in some other business from appointing in your place whomever you desire? And should you be very sick I don't think Gabriela would deviate from what you tell her. And if you give authority to her and your approval, she has the virtue not to give a bad example, and so I am glad to see you are inclined toward her. May God ordain what is best.
7. I was amused by what you said about not believing everything that San Jerónimo says, after I had written the same thing to you so often. And even in a letter addressed to Garciálvarez, which you tore up, I said a great deal lest one give credence to what she says about her spiritual life. Nonetheless, I say that she is a good soul and as long as she does not go astray, there is no reason to compare her with Beatriz; for she errs through a lack of understanding, not out of malice. Now it can be that I am mistaken. If you do not allow her to confess except with the friars of the order, an end will be put to the matter. And if at times she confesses to Rodrigálvarez, tell him my opinion and always give him my best regards.
8. I was glad to see by these letters written to me by the sisters their love for you, and I thought the letters were just fine. In a certain sense reading them was recreation for me; and I was delighted with your letter. If only my displeasure with San Francisco would go away. I believe it is because her letter seemed to me to show little humility and obedience. For this reason you should look after her progress -- for some of the things from Paterna must be sticking to her -- and don't allow her to exaggerate so much. Even though with her circumlocutions she thinks she is not lying, it is far from the demands of perfection to use such a style when she speaks with someone to whom she should speak clearly and by doing so prevent a superior from committing a thousand follies. Tell her this in response to the letter she wrote me and that when she corrects her manner I will be satisfied. I want us to please this great God, for little attention should be paid to me.
9. Oh, my daughter, if I had the time and head to tell at length all the things that have gone on in this house so that you could gain experience and even ask God pardon for not having kept me informed. I have learned that you witnessed some things that I would dare wager have not taken place in any of the very lax monasteries in all Spain. A good intention could have excused some; for others it was not enough. May you learn a lesson from this and keep close to the constitutions -- since you are so fond of them -- if you do not want to end up gaining little from the world and losing out with God.
10. There are not any nuns now who do not realize what danger they were walking in, and they say so, except Beatriz de Jesús, who so loved the sisters that despite the evidence she never informed me; nor does she say anything to me now about it. She has lost much in my esteem.
11. Since I have come, the one who served as confessor no longer does so, nor do I think he ever will. This is what the town needs, for the whole thing was awful, and certainly he would do well if he were subject to another. May God pardon the one who caused him to harm this house, for he could have benefitted and all the nuns with him. He understands well that there is a reason for what is being done. He comes to see me, and I have been most gracious to him -- for that is what is necessary now -- and I feel at ease with his simplicity. A lack of age and experience does much harm. Oh, mi madre, the world is so malicious that it doesn't find good in anything! If with the experience we have had we are not careful, everything will go from bad to worse. You should now look as carefully at everything as an old woman -- since you have received a share in so many trials for love of our Lord -- and I will do the same.
12. I have noticed that you have not sent me any carols, for certainly there are quite a few to choose from. I like to see joy in your house, with moderation, for if I said something, it was for certain situations. My Gabriela is to blame for this. Give her my best regards; I would really like to write to her. I am bringing Sant Angel for subprioress, and the prioress will come from Toledo, although I have not decided who this will be. Pray much to the Lord that this foundation will be of service to him. And I entrust Beatriz to you, for she must be pitied. I am happy with the message from Margarita, may she continue in this spirit. Time will smooth things over as they see the love you have for them.
13. I am amazed at what we owe the good Father Prior of Las Cuevas. Give him my warmest regards. Ask all the nuns to pray to the Lord for me, and you do the same, for I am feeling tired and am very old. It is no surprise that Father Prior likes me, for he is very indebted to me. May God preserve him for us; in having him we have a great good and you are very much obliged to pray for him. May God be with your reverence and watch over you for me, amen.
14. I am not telling you about the responses of Mother Prioress and Beatriz because I am very tired.
15. You should know that my brother has written two letters to me here. He tells me to write to you about his need -- he thinks it is greater than yours -- and that you would be doing him a real favor if you gave him now even a half of what you owe him. I gave the letters to someone here to keep so I could send them to you. Now they cannot find them. You would understand in reading them that I would not be urging you if he himself were not. You should know that he has used up a good part of the rent that you are giving him and that anything you send would be a help to him now. I would have given him something here, but these business matters take up everything.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
16. From the length of this, you will see how much I was desiring to write to you. It is four times the length of those I send to the prioresses up here, and seldom do I write them in my own hand. I was delighted by the good order into which Father Prior put your financial affairs. With regard to what you owe my brother, do not do yourselves harm, even though we are in need. Here all the nuns are very happy, and with such a prioress they have every reason to be. I tell you that she is among the best we have in all our houses, and her health is good, which is an important thing. The house is like a paradise. With regard to the financial loss, I have set up a plan by which they can earn enough to survive. Please God it will help; at least nothing will be lost because of the prioress, for she is a great administrator.
17. Many greetings to Padre Fray Gregorio, ask why he has forgotten me; and to Padre Soto, whose friendship has been very helpful to you.
Serrano is doing well in his place ... you must pray to God for this house; it was well divided. I wish he would return to stay there, for I consider him virtuous and faithful.
