1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. Although I wrote to you a few times recently, I would do so more often if I had a messenger. Since I don't know whether I will have one in Villanueva, I am writing this.
2. I thought we would be gone by now, although they are not late in coming for us. It bothers me to be traveling during Lent.
3. I was delighted with what the prioress of Seville writes about paying what they owe you. She says that almost four hundred ducats will soon be delivered, as you will see from the small paper enclosed. Since the letters have so far to go, I didn't dare send them all. I received two letters from you in which you directed me to ask her for the money. My letter in which I mentioned this to her must have arrived before I wrote to her again. I already told her that you would be satisfied with even half the amount and that if you knew they were in need, you would endure your own without asking them for anything. I don't know if it wouldn't be better that the money remain down there, for you always said you wanted it for the chapel, and now you won't do anything but spend it all. May God direct things; since you want it for him, may you make a profit on the livestock.
4. As I said in the other letters, I am feeling better than I did in Avila, although not without the usual ailments.
5. Soon Padre Nicolao will be back in those parts; you may write to him, for he will be closer than I. When I know he is in Pastrana, I will arrange that he give you that money. The prioress in Toledo is charged with collecting the money that is there. Now I am writing her that on collecting it she give it to you.
6. They are doing well in Seville. From the elderly woman who died in the Indies, they inherited eight hundred ducats which they have now received. I don't know any other news except that the prior of Las Cuevas is at death's door from a fall that he had. Pray for him; we owe him much. What he does for the nuns is tremendous. They will be suffering a great loss.
7. May it please His Majesty that in that solitude you gain a wealth of eternal riches, for everything else is like make-believe money; although with one who uses money as well as you do, it is not bad.
I kiss your hands many times.
Today is ... February.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
