1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. Today Padre Fray Antonio and Father Prior have come from La Roda to get us. They have a coach and a wagon, and from the news they are reporting, I think the foundation will turn out well. Pray to our Lord for this. The good Fray Antonio cannot deny his love for me, since despite his old age he now comes here. I don't like having to go so far; I have already written to you about the reason. Padre Fray Antonio looks well and has gained weight. It seems to me that this year's trials are causing our friars to gain weight.
2. Tell Señor Velasco that I received his letters and would like to respond to them. I don't know if I will have time because I am very busy.
3. May God reward him for obtaining for us the freedom to be able to communicate with you. Together with all the nuns, I pray much to our Lord for him. I would love to know who got this blessing for us and if between himself and Señor Don Luis Manrique a plan could be worked out for obtaining permission from the archbishop to found a monastery in Madrid. On my return from this foundation, I could make a foundation there very quickly without anyone knowing about it until it was done, for I already have someone who will provide the funds for the house. And if the archbishop wants the house to have an income, you already know that Luis Guillamas's daughters are going to enter soon. They will be receiving 400,000 maravedis each year, which for thirteen nuns is enough. Father Vicar will give me the permission right away. Perhaps those gentlemen will know some friend of the archbishop's who might obtain it for us.
4. If you think it opportune, do not fail to take up this matter so that we know whether the answer is yes or no. If by chance the foundation can be made, you must let me know at once. Find someone with whom you can send me letters so that I can keep informed about your health. May our Lord grant it to you, as he can and as I beg of him. Today is 12 February.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
