1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor, my lady. I arrived here in Toledo on the eve of Palm Sunday, and although I had traveled thirty leagues, I wasn't tired but felt healthier than usual. After arriving here, my good health has turned bad. I don't think it will amount to anything serious.
2. I was delighted with the news they gave me here about your improvement. I received your letter in which you tell me that the illness did not suffice to take away your good resolve. May God be praised for everything. I hope in His Majesty that when you are well enough to follow through on your plan, what I have mentioned to you will be accomplished. And if it is not, an alternative will be provided so that your holy desire may surely be realized.
3. I am certain, if God gives me the health, that before long I will go on from here to Madrid, although I wouldn't want anyone to know about this. I am not sure how we will be able to meet, but I will inform you secretly of where I am staying. Write to me and do not forget to pray to our Lord for me and to give my regards to Padre Valentín, although I don't want you to inform anyone of my plan to go there.
4. They tell me that a provincial now appointed for this province of the Society will soon be there, if he hasn't already arrived. You should know that he is one of my best friends. He was my confessor for some years. Try to speak with him, for he is a saint, and do me the favor of hand delivering my enclosed letter to him when he arrives, for I don't know how I would get it to him in any better way. May our Lord guide you in all things, amen.
5. I found that our Sister Inés de la Encarnación had gotten so chubby that I was surprised, and I was consoled to see what a great servant of God she is. May he guide her. She excels in the obedience and in all the virtues.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
6. Father Prior has been well. I gave him your message. I owe him much. I ask you to get an answer to the enclosed letter and send it to me in a very safe way, for this is important to me.
Today is 8 April.
