1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I tell you that God is allowing this poor man to keep tempting us to see the extent of our charity. And indeed, my brother, I show so little charity toward him, that it greatly grieves me. It is not the kind that I should be showing my brother, nor even the kind I should show my neighbor. There is every reason for me to be feeling pity for him in his need, and I feel hardly any. I make up for this by thinking immediately of what I ought to do to please God, and with His Majesty in the picture there's no trial I would not undergo. If it were not for this, I tell you I would not have tried in the least to prevent his trip. My desire to see him out of your house was so great that my happiness far surpassed anything I felt on account of his trial. And so I beg you for the love of our Lord, to do me the favor of not bringing him back into your house no matter how much he begs and how great his need, so that I may be at peace. Indeed, in this matter of wanting to stay with you, he is crazy, although he may not be so in other things. I know from learned men that this is truly possible. And the fault does not lie with La Serna but with his illness, for he wanted to do the same before there was any idea of going there. And truly I have this fear that some disaster will befall him.
2. He says that you are right in being angry, but that he can't do anything more. He well understands that he is a drifter, and he must be exhausted. He says that he was so unhappy at La Serna that he would have rather died than stay there. Now he has arranged with a muleteer to go to Seville tomorrow, but I don't know for what purpose. He is so fragile that one day of sun along the road will kill him -- he was already suffering from a headache -- and in Seville there will be nothing for him to do but spend money and beg alms for the love of God. I, in fact, believed that he still had something that was being kept by Doña Mayor's brother, but he doesn't have anything. It has seemed to me, and only for the sake of God, that I should make him wait until a reply to this letter comes from you, although he is convinced it won't be of any help. Nonetheless, since he is beginning to realize -- finally -- what a lost situation he is in, he is going to wait. For goodness' sake answer me right away and send your letter to the prioress, for I am writing to her to forward it to me the first chance she gets.
3. This unexplainable sadness of yours that you write me about must be caused, I've been thinking, by his departure, for God is very faithful. And if this brother is crazy in this matter, as I believe he is, clearly you would be more obliged by the law of perfection to assist him as you can, not allowing him to go where he will die, and to take the alms you have for others and give them to him as to someone to whom you are more obliged, just as you would be if you were in debt to someone. Otherwise, I don't see that you owe him anything, but much less did Joseph owe his brothers anything.
4. Believe me that God wants anyone to whom he grants the favors he gives you to do great things for him -- and this is a very great thing. But I tell you that with your temperament if he should die along the way, you would never finish lamenting the fact, or God perhaps allowing it to weigh heavily on you. So it is necessary that we consider these things before making an irremediable mistake. If you conduct yourself before God as you ought, you will not be any the poorer for what you give him, for His Majesty will give it back to you in other ways.
5. You gave him two hundred reales for clothing and more for food and for other things that he used while in your house. All of this may seem little, but the cost mounts up to more than you may think. With what you have given him he has enough for his food this year wherever he may choose to go. With another two hundred reales that you might give him each year for food added on to what you were giving him for clothing he can live with my sister (who he says invited him) or with Diego de Guzmán. The latter gave him one hundred reales, which he will spend on this trip. Next year when you decide to give him something you must not give it to him all at once, but give it little by little to the one who will be providing his food, for from what I see he will not be staying long in one place. It's a great pity. But in exchange for his not staying in your house I consider it all for the good. Figure that you are giving a part of that money to me as you would if you saw me in need. I will be grateful, considering it to have been given to me, and have a strong desire not to be a burden to you. I tell you that for some time now I have been longing to see him out of your house, for I sometimes felt afflicted by having to see you put up with that torment and by the fears I mentioned.
6. Since this matter was the purpose of my writing, I have nothing else to add except that I will get the documents from Padre Nicolao, for I believe he is bringing them from Seville and said he will come to see me. I was delighted that Lorencico was so close by. And may God be with him. I will try not to stay here long, for my health isn't as good here as in other places. God willing, I will go to Segovia.
7. Fray Antonio says that, even if for no other reason, he will go there to see you. Padre Gracián is no longer here. My regards to Don Francisco.
Today is Quasimodo Sunday.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
