1. Jesus be with your honor. Because you will have received my long letter on this subject of Pedro de Ahumada, I now have nothing more to say than beg you to answer at once and give the letter to Mother Prioress, for many people travel here from Avila. The poor man is here spending his money and must be very distressed judging by how thin he has gotten. It would sadden me very much if the answer were not to come before the time I depart, which I think will be soon.
2. I am better than I was. In sum, it must be all due to my former illnesses, and there's no reason to be surprised. But I am surprised that I am not worse. I think it was good for my health in Malagón not to have so many letters to answer and so much business.
3. We have heard again from Rome. The negotiations are going very well, although opposition is not lacking. Pray to God about this and about what must be done for Pedro de Ahumada, that His Majesty may enlighten you as to what is the best action to take.
4. I already told you that I had been given the four hundred reales. He must have been using what Diego de Guzmán gave him, and has spent it all. I tell you that with my nature I agonize over not being able in good conscience to give him anything. I would be very happy to do so just to relieve you of this burden. May the Lord provide a remedy.
5. It's painful for me that you do not have Mass except on feast days. I keep trying to think of a solution, but I don't find any. Pedro de Ahumada tells me that your house, especially the bedrooms, is much better than the one in Avila, which made me very happy. But it seems to me that having the young plowmen living in the house would cause a lot of turmoil. If you built some little house for them to stay in, you could get rid of a great deal of noise in the house. Why didn't you divide the kitchen as we had agreed? Well, such jabbering! I realize that each one knows his own house better ...
6. This Serna who is bringing these letters says he will return here within eight days. If you have not already sent your reply, have him bring it to me, for I will not yet be gone. Even if I should have to leave, I would wait.
7. Regarding what you said about Pedro staying in one of our monasteries, he already mentioned it to me, but that wouldn't work out. They don't take in seculars, nor would he be able to bear eating the meals given him. Even now if the meat in an inn is not tender and well cooked, he can't eat it; he will go along on only a pastry. When I can, I send him some trifle, but this isn't often. I don't know who would be able to put up with him and be so precise in serving him.
8. This humor is a terrible thing that does harm to oneself and to everyone else. May God give you the good I beg for you and free you from Pedro's returning to your house. All other means of helping him I desire to try so that if he should die, neither you nor I will have any regrets.
9. My best regards to Don Francisco and to Aranda. May God watch over you and make you very holy, amen. Why don't you tell me how you are getting along in solitude?
Today is 15 April.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
