1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honors, amen. You show me so much kindness and charity through your letters that even were your last letter more severe, I would have felt well repaid and obliged once more to serve you. You say that you sent me a letter through Padre Mariano that I might know the reasons for your request. Because you have given me such good ones and you know so well how to put forth the value of what you want, I'm afraid my reasons are of little weight. And so I'm not thinking of defending myself, but as with those who have a hopeless case I will shout and cry out and remind you that you are always more obliged to favor orphan daughters and minors over chaplains. For, in the end, everything is yours -- how much so -- even the monastery and those living in it, but not those who, as you say, are in a hurry to finish quickly, and sometimes with little devotion.
2. You have done me a great favor in agreeing to that matter concerning Vespers, for it's a subject about which I can do nothing. As for the rest, I am writing to Mother Prioress to do as you ask, and I am sending her your letter. Perhaps by leaving everything in her hands and those of Señor Alonso Alvarez, we will gain more. The two of them can work out an agreement among themselves. I kiss your honor's hands many times. I was very sorry to learn of the pain in your side from which you suffered. Here we offered it to the Lord, and so I pray for all of you and for those angels. May God make them his own and preserve them.
3. There is one thing that would seriously inconvenience the nuns and be burdensome to them: a Mass to be said before the High Mass when a saint's feast is being celebrated, especially if there is a sermon. I don't know how that can be arranged. It should matter little to all of you that on such a day the feast be celebrated at the High Mass; and a little before it, the low Mass by the chaplain could be celebrated. The need for this will not arise often. Try to put up with this opposition to your desire and do me this favor, even though the day may be a festive one; of course, I'm not referring to ceremonies requested by one of you. Know that this matter is not important, and you will be doing the nuns a good deed and me a great favor.
4. After the letter to our Father General went out, I realized that there was no reason for it; anything Father Visitator does is as valid as something done by the pope, for no general or general chapter can undo it. The visitator is very learned and well informed, and your honor will enjoy dealing with him. I think that without doubt he will make a visitation of the monastery there this summer, and he will be able to set up firmly what you ask for. I will speak to him about this when he passes through here. Well, I will not depart in the slightest from what you see as serving best for greater stability nor from anything by which I might serve you. I am sorry I am not in a place where I could show you my good will from close at hand. I earnestly recommend myself to the prayers of Señora Doña Francisca Ramírez. I no longer have a fever, glory to God.
5. You can indeed write to me all that you want, for I know the spirit in which you write. My only pain would be to cause you pain. For surely I would not want to cause you any or that anyone in that house do so. As for the rest, nothing that you have ever said has caused me any harm, nor will it. May our Lord bestow on you all the spiritual blessings that I ask His Majesty for, and may he always guide you.
Today is the Sunday after the Ascension.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
