1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. Yesterday I received your letters. They came after the one about the rector of Alcalá. I discussed this with Señora Doña Luisa and with the licentiate, Serrano. And he answered in the enclosed letter.
2. Regarding the clash of opinions you mention, I was very happy to learn that your opinion prevailed; for even though the fathers must have enough reasons, it would have been worse not to do what was safest at that time, but to be thinking of points of honor. When honor of the world is lost by one's acting in this way, one begins to understand how important it is to look only to God's honor. It could be they feared that a greater harm might result from a change in approach toward the enmity. The truth is that God provides with his grace when we are determined to do something for him alone. You have nothing to feel distressed about in this case, but it would be good if you presented some reason for excusing those fathers. I feel more distressed to see you going around in the midst of those contagious fevers.
3. Blessed be God that you are in good health, for my illness no longer amounts to anything, as I have written to you. Only weakness remains, for I went through a terrible month, which I spent mostly on my feet. Since I am used to dealing with chronic pain, I thought that in spite of feeling quite sick, it was possible to put up with it. Certainly, I thought I was dying, although I didn't completely believe this, nor did whether I die or live matter to me. God grants me this favor, which I consider a great one, for I remember the fear I used to have at other times.
4. I was delighted to see this letter from Rome; for although the dispatch is not coming as soon as was thought, it seems certain it will come. I don't know what kinds of turmoil its arrival might cause, nor why. It is good that you wait for Father Vicar, Fray Angel, even if for no other reason than to prevent the appearance that you cannot wait to set out on your mission as soon as you receive it; he will take note of everything.
5. You should know that I wrote to Beas and to Fray John of the Cross that you are going down there and about the commission that you have. Fray Angel wrote to me of how he had given it to you. Although I thought for a while that I should be silent, it seemed to me that since Father Vicar told me about it there was no need to be silent. I would so much like not to lose time, but if our documents are to arrive soon, it will undoubtedly be better to wait so that everything can be carried out with greater freedom, as you say.
6. Even if you don't come to see me, I considered it a great gift for you to say that if I want you will come. It would be a real joy for me, but I fear the remarks of our brothers and the fatigue it would cause you, for you still have a long way to travel. I must satisfy myself with the thought that you will have to come eventually out of necessity. I would then like some of your time one day to find relief in conferring with you about the things of my soul.
7. When I get a little more of my strength back, I will try to speak with the archbishop. If he gives me permission for a foundation in Madrid, it will be undoubtedly much better for her to enter there than elsewhere. These nuns become so disappointed when what they want isn't done that they torment me. Since I am waiting to see whether the Madrid foundation is possible, I have not written to the prioress in Segovia, nor have I spoken seriously about their receiving her. I believe that although the prioress doesn't like the idea, all the other nuns would accept her. But I don't have time to go into this because according to what Father Vicar wrote me, I cannot stay here any longer than is necessary for me to be strong enough to travel, and I am becoming scrupulous about not moving on. There are many nuns in Segovia, and now they want to receive another. But since she would be going there only temporarily, it shouldn't matter to them.
8. If nonetheless you think it worthwhile I will write to the prioress in Segovia. You too should tell her that you would be very pleased if they accepted her, that this is very important. That house has been of little help or almost no help in all our business matters. And when you tell her about all we owe to Velasco, it will have a good effect. Here they just gave five hundred ducats at my request to St. Joseph's in Avila. A tangle of things happened there, which I will tell you about, that was no one's fault; otherwise I would have already dealt with the matter.
9. Truly, until I speak to the archbishop, I don't know if it would be good to bring this matter up in Segovia. Let me know soon what you want done, for there are many carriers who will come here, if you pay a good portage. To bring her to Segovia without the nuns' knowing about her and wanting her would be unacceptable. And the permission from Padre Fray Angel -- which I already have -- sets this acceptance down as a condition. I didn't mention to him who she was. I tell you that I desire to accept her much more than you do. I think it would be better to speak with the archbishop in his house, entering through a church where he says Mass. When I am well enough I will do this and inform you. I have no more to say for now except that may God watch over you and give you what I beg of him. It is 5 May.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
