1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your excellency. I have had a great desire to write to you ever since I learned that you were home. But my health has been so poor that since Holy Thursday a fever had not gone away until only eight days ago, and it was the least of what I suffered. The doctors were saying that I had an abscess on the liver. With bloodlettings and purges God was pleased to leave me in this sea of trials. May it please His Majesty to give them to me alone and not to someone for whom I would feel more pain than by suffering them myself. Here we have learned that the whole business you've been undergoing has come to a happy conclusion.
2. I don't know what to say except that our Lord does not want us to experience joy without some sadness, as I believe you must feel having to be apart from the one whom you love so much. But may our Lord so ordain that you gain greatly in his sight and afterward come to enjoy all consolation together. May it please His Majesty to do for you what I and all these houses of nuns with the greatest care beg of him. So that the outcome be a happy one, I have instructed them to take this very much to heart in their prayers. And, even though wretched, I keep this intention before me, and this we will do until receiving the news I desire.
3. I am thinking about the pilgrimages and prayers you will now be occupied with and how it will often seem to you that life in prison was more restful. Oh, God help me, what vanities are those of this world! And how much better it is not to desire rest or anything having to do with it, but to place everything involving ourselves into the hands of God, for he knows better than we do what befits us.
4. I long to know how your health is and how everything else is going for you, and so I beg you to let me know. Don't worry in the least if the message isn't in your own hand. For since it has been so long since I have seen anything in your handwriting, the messages that Padre Maestro Gracián sends me on your part satisfy me. I am not going to mention where I will be going when I am ready to leave here or anything else, because Fray Antonio de Jesús will be going to Alba soon, and he will give you an account of everything.
5. Anyway, a kindness you must render me now -- for it is important to me that the favor you show me in everything be known -- regards the Society of Jesus. They founded a house in Pamplona de Navarra and experienced a very peaceful beginning. Afterward such a great persecution arose against them that the people wanted to expel them from there. They sought the protection of the constable, and he supported them, speaking kindly to them and favoring them in many ways. What I ask you to do for me is write a letter to the constable thanking him for what he has done and directing him to continue helping them in every way he can.
6. Since -- for my sins -- I know the affliction that religious go through in seeing themselves persecuted, I have felt great pity for them, and I believe that whoever helps and favors them gains much in the sight of His Majesty. And I would like you to experience this gain, for I think His Majesty will be so pleased that I would even dare ask the duke to do this if he were here.
7. The people of the city say that the cost of having them will mean less left for themselves. But a gentleman is providing a house and a very good income for them, certainly not leaving them in poverty. And even if they were founded in poverty, the people would be showing very little faith in so great a God if they thought he was not powerful enough to provide food for those who serve him.
8. May His Majesty watch over you and give you so much of his love that during the time of the duke's absence you will be able to endure your loss with calm, for I believe it will be impossible to do so without pain.
9. Along with the one who brings your answer to this, I beg you to send also the letter I am here begging of you. And it must not be so written as to seem to be the usual letter asking for a favor, but it must say that it is your will that this be done.
10. But how importunate I am! Yet after all the suffering that you cause me, and have caused, it will not be hard for you to put up with my boldness.
Today is 8 April, from this house of St. Joseph's in Toledo -- I meant to say May.
Your excellency's unworthy subject and servant,
Teresa of Jesus
