1. Jesus be with your paternity, mi padre. After having sent you a letter yesterday, the feast of the Most Blessed Trinity, I received the one you said you had written to me at the same time as to Padre Nicolao. The others arrived today. It was truly necessary that our friars remain there in the midst of that turmoil. Blessed be the One who so ordains things. So that you won't feel sorry thinking that your letters were lost, I am writing this one, and I regret that Señora Doña Juana has to be paying so much in postage. I recommend myself to her prayers.
2. I have also received a letter today from the prioress in Segovia who tells me to bring Juana López with me, that all the nuns will be delighted. But I had written to them in such a way that they couldn't have done otherwise. This wasn't necessary as regards the prioress, for she is willing to please you and me. Blessed be God that the need for me to be negotiating these matters, and the others that arose, has come to an end. For I tell you, mi padre, much ingenuity was required, for each prioress looks after her own house and then thinks the rest will get by.
3. It is really necessary that she be provided with a bed, for this can't be avoided, as well as the money for her trousseau. I would have liked to pay for these, but I am extremely poor right now for reasons I will explain when I see you. If you think it would not be good to bring this up now, we will look for another way, although certainly for the moment I don't see any. In what regards the dowry, things will go better if that other foundation is made.
4. For many reasons, I don't think anything would be lost if you came here for Corpus Christi and we were to set out together. Coming in a carriage will not be very tiring. Although Padre Fray Antonio will not let go of the idea of coming with me, his condition is such that we will have much to do for him. Once Corpus Christi has passed there will be nothing else to wait for, except the authorization from the archbishop, which never gets finalized. I was most happy with Beatriz. And what a hurry Padre Nicolao is in to have you go there! In my opinion, for the very same reason, this would not be fitting, and now he himself agrees. This would kill you, even if there were no other drawback. Because we will be speaking of this and other things, please God, I'll say no more.
Your paternity's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
