For Mother Prioress at the Carmel of St. Joseph's in Seville.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my mother. It seems our Lord doesn't want me to go long without having something to suffer.
2. You should know that our Lord has been pleased to bring to himself his good friend and servant Lorencio de Cepeda. He was struck by such intense hemorrhaging that he suffocated from it in less than six hours. He had received Communion two days before and died fully conscious, entrusting himself to our Lord.
3. I hope in the divine mercy that he went to enjoy the Lord, for he was at a point in which anything that did not deal with serving our Lord wearied him. For this reason he was happy to stay at his country property which was a league from Avila. He used to say that worldly compliments made him feel uneasy. His prayer was continual because he always walked in the presence of God, and His Majesty granted him so many favors that sometimes I was amazed. He was very inclined toward penance and so he did more than I would have desired him to do. He looked to me for advice in everything; it was strange, the credit he gave to what I told him, and this was because of his great love for me. I am repaying him by rejoicing that he has gone forth from so miserable a life and that he is now safe. And this is not just a way of speaking, but I feel joy when I think of this. I feel sorry for his children, but I think that because of their father God will show them his favor.
4. I have given you such a full account because I know that his death will cause you and all my sisters there, to grieve, and I want to console you thereby. It is a wonderful thing how much he felt their trials and his love for them. Now it is time to repay him and recommend him to our Lord, on the condition that if he has no need of your prayers (as I believe he doesn't, for our faith allows me to think this way), they may serve to benefit the souls most in need of them.
5. You should know that a little before he died he wrote a letter to me here at St. Joseph's in Segovia, which is where I now am (eleven leagues from Avila), telling me things that didn't seem to imply anything else than that he knew what little time he had left to live, for it has amazed me.
6. It seems to me, my daughter, that everything passes so quickly that we should be thinking more about how to die than how to live. Please God, since I am left here, I may serve him in some way, for I am four years older than he, and I never manage to die; rather, I've recovered from the illness I had, and only experience the usual ailments, especially headaches.
7. Tell Padre Fray Gregorio to consider this letter to be for him and to remember my brother, for he felt deeply the trials of the order. And tell him that I understand what he must be going through with that task, but that he must be patient, and you too. Each day we are waiting for the dispatch to arrive from Rome, and our father is keeping himself busy since it wouldn't seem right for him not to be here when it arrives. He is well, glory to God. Here he has been visiting this house with Father Vicar, Fray Angel, and he will return with me to Avila the day after tomorrow. I don't know how long I'll have to stay there in order to arrange for what must be given to Teresa. The poor soul has lost a great deal with the death of her father -- for he deeply loved her -- and the community did also. May God provide a remedy.
8. You should know that the authorization you gave for payment of the four hundred ducats is worthless, for the trust fund in Toledo will not pay so soon, and please God the amount will be paid. I turned the matter over to the nuns there before leaving. Regarding Valladolid, I will write now to Padre Nicolao to send me the documents because when I am finished in Avila, I think I will receive orders to go there on my way to the foundation in Palencia, and I will then see if something can be done. I should even be going there at once from here. But now that they have a broker, he will be in a greater hurry to collect that money. Consider how you might pay what you owe. If a good postulant comes along, it wouldn't hurt to accept her with this in mind and for what you are contributing to the negotiations in Rome.
9. May God provide a remedy for it all, for I was afraid that the holy prior of Las Cuevas would be missed very much. Nonetheless, I am happy they are allowing him to rest. Let him know this for me and send him my best wishes and highest regards, and the same to Padre Rodrigo Alvarez and tell him that his letter arrived just at the right moment -- all about the good that comes to us through trials -- and that if God is already working miracles through him during his life, what will happen after his death.
10. I would consider it a miracle, in fact, if this poor soul has become as well aware of her fault as you say. What seems to you very good in that she condemns Garciálvarez, seems bad to me, and I wouldn't believe much of what she might tell me about him. I think he is a conscientious man, and I have always believed that it was she who made him lose his head. Nonetheless, even though everything may not meet our desires, I was delighted with the news. Many prayers here were offered for her; perhaps the Lord has shown her mercy. I was really sorry after I saw in the reports that they had allowed her to receive communion. I tell you, madre, it is not right for things like this to go unpunished, and it would have been good not to allow her to be released from the perpetual prison to which it was decided to condemn her.
11. Your letter took so long to reach me that I think it is too late now to go into the matter in question, for I don't know when this letter of mine will go out. They gave me your letter on the vigil of the feast of St. Peter, and it bore a date in May, the 15th I believe. I don't know what to say. But to be waiting for Padre Gracián to come is foolish. The best thing to do is to have her admit and take back all of her lies before he comes so that it won't appear that he persuaded her to do this. I am amazed that this did not occur to you.
12. In case she has spoken calumnies that at some time might do harm, it is necessary that Padre Rodrigo Alvarez consider what must be done and that she retract what she said and sign it. Please God, my daughter, that this will appease God and that this soul may not be lost. May His Majesty console that poor Pablo. He must be a good man, since God gives him so many trials.
13. Do you think it is some small matter to have a house where you can see those galleys. Here they are envious, for it is a great gift with which to praise our Lord. I tell you that if they didn't have it, they would miss it.
14. Now they have told me that the Moriscos in that region of Seville are planning to rise up with the city. You were on a good path toward becoming martyrs. Find out whether this is true and have Mother Subprioress write us about it.
15. I am happy that her health is good, but am sorry that yours is poor. For the love of God take good care of yourself. They tell me that for that urine problem one must gather some dog rose when it is mature, then dry and crush it into powder and take a half real in the morning. Ask a doctor about it. And don't be so long before writing me, for goodness' sake.
16. My best regards to all the sisters and especially to San Francisco. The sisters here and Mother Prioress send their regards. It must seem nice to be in the midst of those flags and the tumult, if you know how to draw spiritual benefit from all the news you probably hear down there, but you need to walk with much care so as not to be distracted. I long for you all to be very holy. But what would happen if the foundation in Portugal were made! Don Teutonio, the Archbishop of Evora, writes me that the distance from here is no more than forty leagues. Certainly, a foundation in Portugal would make me very happy.
17. You should know that as long as I live, I desire to do something in God's service. Since I've done so little, I don't want to spend the time as idly as I have done these past years in which I only suffered interiorly with nothing else to show. Beg our Lord to give me the strength to do something in his service. I have already told you to give this letter to Padre Fray Gregorio, that he can consider it as for him, for I certainly love him in the Lord and desire to see him. My brother died the Sunday after the feast of St. John.
18. Watch for me, in your charity, to see when the fleet arrives. Try hard to get information from those coming from Ciudad de los Reyes whether Diego López de Zúñiga is living or dead. And if he is dead arrange to have testimony of this given before a notary and send it to me taking every cautionary measure. And if possible get two or three to testify; in short, do whatever you can. For if he is dead, we can then buy some houses for the nuns in Salamanca. I have arranged for this from those who will inherit them when he dies. It is the greatest pity in the world what the nuns have to put up with where they are. I don't know how it is that they are not dead. He is a gentleman from Ciudad de los Reyes, I mean Diego López de Zúñiga. And if he is alive you must also inform me of when the fleet will leave so that I can send some messages to him. Consider this matter to be very important, for it must be undertaken with great care. He was seventy-five years old and moreover very sick; he is probably by now in heaven.
19. You can write me by way of Madrid, sending the letters to Padre Gracián's mother, Doña Juana de Antisco. I will try to write to you again soon. Please God this letter will not be lost.
May His Majesty watch over you and do what I desire for you.
Today is 4 July.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
