For the Mother Prioress of St. Joseph's Carmel in Seville.
1. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. You will have already received my letter in which I told you how God took to himself my good brother, Lorenzo de Cepeda, and how I was going to Avila to look after Teresa and her brother, who feel very much alone. At present I am in Medina del Campo on my way to Valladolid where I am now being ordered to go. You can write to me often because of the regular mail delivery there. You know how happy I am to receive your letters.
2. I am bringing my nephew Don Francisco with me because some documents have to be prepared in Valladolid. I tell you that before all of this is settled there will be no lack of trials for him or for me. If I hadn't been told that I am rendering God a great service in that I am protecting my nephews, I would have let the whole thing go since I have little desire to become involved in these matters. My nephew is very virtuous.
3. You have to help me from there with anything having to do with the Indies, and so I beg you for love of God that, when the fleet arrives, find out if there is any money being brought for my brother -- please God he may be enjoying glory -- and let me know so that arrangements may be made to collect it. And don't neglect to do so with care, and find out if they are bringing any letters; try to get information about what I mentioned in a previous letter, whether Diego López de Zúñiga who was living in Ciudad de los Reyes is dead.
4. My brother left the money owed to him by your house for the construction of a chapel at St. Joseph's in Avila, that he might be buried in it. I have already told you that the authorization for payment that you sent makes it so difficult to recover the money that I don't know if anything will be collected. At least the money in Toledo -- which I entrusted to the charge of the nuns -- will be given, I think, little by little and late, if at all. For the debtor says that I don't know what kind of calculations have to be made, because he has letters from somewhere else, or I don't know what, that testify to a partial payment that was made. And he enjoys such prestige that no one wants to pressure him about anything. As for what is owed to Valladolid, I will now find out if Padre Nicolao sends me the papers. Since I am executor of the will, I will have to try to collect, although I don't want to. So you should arrange to settle this debt. And for what he has lent and given to the order, it wouldn't be a bad idea to accept a nun without a dowry, if you find a good one.
5. The enclosed letter addressed to the president of the Chamber of Commerce in Seville is from the bishop of the Canary Islands, who is a friend of his. He asks him to take care of holding the money should it arrive from the Indies. See that it is consigned to a trustworthy person and that everything is arranged in the best way possible, my daughter. Do all this for me as a way of celebrating what I now wish to tell you.
6. You should know that five days ago our brother Fray Jerónimo Gracián received a letter from Fray Juan de Jesús in Rome. (Padre Gracián is now here, for he has accompanied me on this trip and been of great help to me in these business matters.) In the letter, Fray Juan tells Padre Gracián that the brief concerning the matter of our negotiations has been given to the king's ambassador in Rome to send to the king and that the brief was being brought in the same mail delivery as his own letter. And so we are certain that it is now in the hands of the king. In his letter Fray Juan gives a generous summary of the brief's content. May God be praised who has shown us so much favor. You can truly give him thanks.
7. Padre Fray Jerónimo told me that he would write to Padre Fray Gregorio. I don't know if he will be able to, because he is preaching today. If the mail service allows him the time, he will not fail to write. Otherwise you may give Fray Gregorio this news and my regards. Please God he is in good health, for I felt sorry about his illness. Write to me briefly if he is now well, for until knowing this I am not going to write to him. I also need to beg him to help you get this information I am asking of you. And tell me what kind of summer you're having, for I am afraid for you when I see how hot it is here, and let me know how Beatriz is doing and all the nuns. Give my best regards to them and especially to Mother Subprioress. Padre Nicolao is well, glory to God.
8. My health is reasonably good, along with many worries and trials, but they don't bother me much. May His Majesty be with you and preserve you for me. I feel so fortunate to have you there for these business matters from the Indies, for I think everything will be done well. Write to me also as to whether, when some money arrives, if I send you the authorization, you would be able to collect it for me and keep it in your house. Write at length about your health. May God bestow it upon you in the measure that I desire and the need that he sees, amen.
Today is the feast of the Transfiguration.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
