1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with mi padre, amen. Today, the feast of St. Francis, I received two letters from you in which I learned to my delight that your health is improving. Please God, it will always be good, as I beg of him. I have been very happy about the agreement, for it is a good one. Even if it were for less, litigation is not for us.
2. I am now well, we can say, and I eat better. The same is true of my weakness, for I am recovering some strength, although I don't dare write this myself. Little by little I will get well. Don't be distressed about my sickness; what you have gone through is enough.
3. Oh, how it bothered me that Mother Prioress in her letter did not mention anything about Don Luis, and how Señora Doña Juana is already better. Our María de San José is already up and around, her fever is gone, and her joyfulness makes it seem she hadn't suffered anything.
4. In regard to the letter of Pedro de Ahumada, there's no need to pay any attention to it. I thought it would be even worse. He was very wrong in not sending what they asked of him. Don Francisco will not be protected against him unless he turns over his affairs to me, for I am the one to whom Don Pedro will show some respect. That fortune must have diminished greatly, but it doesn't matter because of the gain in what is essential. Now that I am better, things will not bother me so much, for sickness must greatly weaken the heart, especially for anyone who has a heart like mine. Don't think, though, that I am foundering completely.
5. Teresita's letter pleased me very much as did also the news that Don Francisco is happy and healthy. May God guide him. If Pedro de Ahumada is making the journey on his old nag, it ought to be left with Don Francisco, and Don Pedro should be sent on with a rented mule. But he is so disagreeable that I don't believe he will consent to the idea. The horse does nothing but add to his expenses. And so Don Francisco should tell him that he will not be given lodging at La Serna; and that will put an end to his comings and goings. He should bear with him as best he can without giving him anything or signing anything for him. He should tell him that he will always be given what my brother left him -- which is carefully set down -- and remind him that those at La Serna gave him a hundred reales at the request of the prioress. I don't know how he can say that he hasn't been given anything. This melancholy of his is a real trial. And my head is in such a condition that although I am not writing this myself, I am not able to go on as long as I would desire. May God watch over you and make you as holy as I beg of him.
6. Give my regards to those lords and to Mother Prioress, Inés de Jesús. San Bartolomé asks for your prayers and is much consoled to hear that you are well.
7. I very much want Don Francisco to be firm with Pedro de Ahumada, asking him why he won't agree with Perálvarez in the management of the property. They stand in the way of each other. Although Pedro de Ahumada says he is doing something, he doesn't do anything. An administrator is needed both for what Francisco de Salcedo left to the nuns and for this property, and then we wouldn't have to worry so much.
8. In no way should Don Francisco hold back from telling Pedro de Ahumada about his desire to change his state in life (and even tell him more if he can). Things can no longer be concealed, as you mention, for that little page has gone around talking about it. And he will talk more there; he knows well how to exaggerate. The Lord Licentiate Godoy told me here that he had heard it from the former magistrate in Avila and that other persons had told him about it here, and so it is already public knowledge. There is no reason for keeping secret what is going to be done. As soon as it is known for certain, everyone will keep quiet. Given his character, I don't think it will matter to Don Francisco. He wrote me a letter that made me praise God. May God be with you.
9. I am afraid lest that little mule not be good for you, and I think it would be right for you to buy a new one. If this is true, someone can be found to lend the money. I will send the amount to you as soon as we can collect it. Or sell the old horse if Pedro will let go of it. My only fear, mi padre, is that you will buy something that will throw you to the ground. Since that mule is so little, I don't fear your being thrown off. Nor do I think it would be good for Don Francisco to journey to the monastery on an animal that he is not going to donate when he receives the habit. Consider what is the best thing to do in everything, and stop being timid, for you kill me with that.
Your paternity's unworthy daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
10. Read to Don Francisco the part here about Pedro de Ahumada. See if the best thing wouldn't be for you to send him to me, for here we can come to some agreement.
