1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. This letter is not in my own hand because I wrote a great deal to Avila today and my head is tired out. Yesterday I wrote to you through Señora Doña Juana de Antisco, and before that I wrote you another very long letter. Please God it arrived there better than yours are arriving here -- if you wrote any -- for I worry very much until I know whether you arrived there safely. I am writing now so that you will know about the mail delivery between here and there and not fail to use it to write to me. I am well, glory to God, and the fever has also left Sister María de San José.
2. What I mentioned in yesterday's letter is the story of Don Francisco, which has astonished us all. It would seem they undid him so as to remake him into a different person. I am not surprised about his behavior toward his relatives, but I am surprised that God so abandons a creature who was desiring to serve him. Great are God's judgments. I felt great pity when I saw him. He is now actively engaged in managing his property and is attached to it, and he is so afraid of speaking with either discalced friars or discalced nuns that I don't think he would want to see any of us, and least of all me. They say that he claims he is afraid that the desire he had will return. In this is seen the great temptation to which he must be prey. I beg you to recommend him to God and show him compassion. He is looking to get married, but not outside Avila. It will be a poor marriage, for he is not without his regrets. The fact that you and Padre Nicolao abandoned him so soon must have influenced his decision very much. And that house in Pastrana isn't very enticing, in my opinion. A great burden has been lifted from me.
3. The chapel is again on track, for Padre Fray Angel wrote me about it yesterday. It all tires me out very much. He never did go to Madrid, for he is coming now to San Pablo de la Moraleja. He says that the general has sent him the acts of the chapter. Padre Pedro Fernández is not dead; he is doing very poorly. Here most of the sisters are well and want to know about you. And my secretary and Madre Inés de Jesús kiss your hands.
4. Since I think you will be concerned about what was paid to Godoy, you should know that I gave orders for it to appear to be a loan, and so as matters ended up he owed me more than I did him.
It is after Matins and the eve of Our Lady of the Presentation, a day I will not forget, for that was the day the near riot broke out when you presented the brief to the Carmel there. May God watch over you and make you as holy as I beg of him, amen.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
5. God willing, this letter will be legible considering the haste with which it was written. Francisco is very disturbed, and I have learned that he suffers from stomachaches, headaches, and a weak heart. God granted me a great favor by his not taking the habit. He mentioned often in Avila that nobody forced him to do anything. I tell you, mi padre, that I always feared what I now see. I don't know why, but I have felt relief not to have to be responsible for him, even though he says that with regard to his marriage he will not do anything that I would not want. But I fear he will find little happiness. And so if it were not for the fact that I might appear to be displeased over what he has done, I wouldn't bother with what he is planning.
6. If you saw the letter that he wrote me from Alcalá and Pastrana you would be amazed by his happiness and the haste with which he wanted me to intervene on his behalf so that they give him the habit. He must have undergone a fierce temptation. But I did not speak to him about this, because he was very upset and a relative of his was with him. He must feel very embarrassed. May God provide, and may he watch over you. In my opinion he would have been a holy man among holy men. I hope in God for his salvation, for he does have a fear of offending God.
7. Your companion, San Bartolomé, sends her best regards, and she has a great concern and desire to know how you fared along those roads and without us, for here we do very poorly without you; it seems we have been left in a desert. Sister Casilda de la Concepción sends you her regards.
8. May our Lord keep you for us and allow us to see you soon, padre mio, amen. So as not to tire you, I'll say no more.
Your paternity's unworthy subject, Ana de San Bartolomé.
9. If you learn anything about the good Fray Bartolomé de Jesús, let me know, for this would be very consoling to me.
