1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I don't know how to answer someone with so much humility as is shown in your letter and so much graciousness as well, for I do not deserve to be so treated. May our Lord answer for me, and His Majesty repay you, for he has been pleased that I be unable to serve you in any of the ways that I would like, which would be such a blessing for me. I don't deserve anything more. May he be blessed for everything.
2. From the letter accompanying this one, you will see how Don Francisco's choice of a state in life did not depend on any opinion of mine. And by my entrusting the letter to you will be seen my esteem for you. And so I beg you ...
3. ... And it seemed the same to all of us, especially Don Francisco, who showed himself to be what he is, your servant, and with great happiness to be so, and with little desire for Madrid. And that was the conclusion, and he wanted it very much; and I believe he truly did. And so I am not astonished by any signs that may have been given; I trust in your great prudence that this will not take away one iota of the great value you find in him. Nonetheless, I felt deep regret.
4. Since Diego de Tapia went to Madrid and saw such a tangled mess and what little attention was paid to it, he was astonished and wrote to me at once about what was going on. When I wrote to Avila by way of the commander, I did so in order to find out what took place and inform those who were not in Madrid. But they were already gone. On the feast of the Immaculate Conception of Our Lady, they gave me some letters ...
5. ... it was neither Don Francisco's will nor mine that the matter not be brought to completion, for we are not failing to consider your rank as lord. You can be certain that what I can do, which is to recommend you to our Lord in my poor prayers, I will do from here on, and consider myself your servant.
May His Majesty preserve your illustrious honor with much holiness. Amen.
Today is 10 December ...
