1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor, my son. You can well believe that the bad news about which I must write you in this letter distresses me greatly. But realizing that you will learn of it from someone else and that no one will be able to inform you well about the consolation that such a great trial may contain, I have wanted to tell you myself. And if we consider well the miseries of this life, we will rejoice over the joy of those who are already with God.
2. Two days after the feast of St. John, His Majesty was pleased to bring my good brother Lorencio de Cepeda to himself. A hemorrhage caused a quick death. He had gone to confession and received communion on the feast of St. John. And I believe it was a gift, considering the condition he was in, that he didn't live longer. In regards to his soul, I know well that he was always ready. Eight days before, he had written me a letter in which he spoke of how he had only a short time left to live, although he didn't know the exact date.
3. He died entrusting himself to God, like a saint. And so, according to our faith we can believe that he remained for little or no time at all in purgatory. Although he was always, as you know, God's servant, he was so in the end in such a way that he wanted nothing to do with anything earthly. And except for persons who spoke only of God, everything else tired him to such an extent that I found it hard to console him. So he went to La Serna to find more solitude, and there he died, or to put it better, began to live. If I were able to write some of the details about his soul, you would understand how obliged you are to God for having given you so good a father and would live in a way that shows you are his son. But a letter doesn't allow for more than what was said, except that you should be consoled and believe that he can do you more good from where he is than by being on earth.
4. It has made me, more than anyone else, feel very sad. And the same is true of the good Teresita de Jesús, although God gave her such courage that she bore the loss like an angel, and she is like an angel and a very good nun as well and happy to be one. I hope in God that she will be like her father. As for me I have had no lack of worries until seeing Don Francisco settled as he is now, for he was left very much alone since as you know we have few relatives.
5. He was so sought after in Avila for marriage that I feared he might choose an unsuitable wife. God was pleased that he get married on the feast of the Immaculate Conception to a lady from Madrid who has a mother but no father. The mother wanted this marriage so much that we were amazed, for considering her status she could have done much better. Even though the dowry is small, none of the persons in Avila that we considered could have brought as much even had they wanted to.
6. The bride's name is Doña Orofrisia. She is not yet fifteen; beautiful and very discreet. I mean to say Doña Orofrisia de Mendoza y de Castilla. Her mother is a first cousin of the Duke of Albuquerque, a niece of the Duke of Infantazgo and related to many other titled lords. In sum, on both her mother's and father's side, they say, the noble background is unsurpassable in Spain. In Avila, she is related to the Marquis de las Navas, the Marquis de Velada, and more closely to the wife of Don Luis, of Mosen Rubí.
7. They gave him four thousand ducats. He wrote me that he is very happy which is what matters. What pleases me is that Doña Beatriz, her mother, is a woman of such merit and discretion that she will be able to direct them both and make adjustments, they say, so as to keep the spending within moderation. Doña Orofrisia has only one brother, who is older than she, and a sister who is a nun. If her brother doesn't have any children, she will inherit the primogeniture. This is possible.
8. I don't see any other drawback here except for Don Francisco's lack of means, for the estate is so burdened with debt that if he doesn't soon receive what is owed to him from over there, I don't know how he will be able to live. So, for the love of God, do all you can to get it. Since God is giving them so much honor, they need the means to sustain it.
9. Up until now Don Francisco has shown himself to be very virtuous, and I hope in God that he will continue to be so, for he is a very good Christian. Please God that I will hear news like this about you. Now you see, my son, how all things come to an end, but the good or bad we do in this life is eternal and will have no end.
10. Pedro de Ahumada is well, and also my sister and her children, although they are left in serious need because my brother -- may he be in glory -- was helping them very much. A short time ago Don Gonzalo, my sister's son, was here. He along with others regard you highly, for you have fooled them into having a good opinion of you. I would have liked to see you become better. Please God you will now do so, and may His Majesty give you the virtue and holiness that I beg of him, amen.
11. You can send letters to the monastery of the nuns in Seville, for the prioress is the same as the one who was there when I was, and all the conflicts have been resolved very well, glory to God. I am writing this in our monastery in Valladolid. The prioress here kisses your hands, and I the hands of our relatives, those lords and ladies.
Teresa of Jesus
