For Mother Prioress of the Carmel of St. Joseph's in Seville.
1. Jesus, Mary. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter, and I hope that His Majesty has given you as holy a Christmas as I desired for you. I wanted very much for this letter to be in my own hand, but my head and the many things I have to do, since the time to leave for Palencia is at hand, prevent me from writing it myself. Pray for us that the new foundation may be a means to render God much service.
2. I am better, glory to God, and consoled to know that you are as well. For the love of God, take care of yourself and be careful about what you drink, for you know the harm it does you. Two sisters who had those swellings were greatly helped by taking an infusion of rhubarb several mornings in succession. Consult with your doctor, and if he thinks it fitting, take it.
3. I received both your letters. In one you mentioned your happiness in having Padre Gracián present. I am also happy that you have someone with whom you feel at ease and can consult; you have been suffering alone for a long time.
4. In the other letter, you were speaking of the business in the Indies. I was delighted that you have someone there who is dealing with this matter carefully, for there is no other remedy for that house in Salamanca. If nothing comes before the day on which they will be obliged to leave the house where they are, we will find ourselves in dire straits. So for the love of God make every effort to have this packet delivered, for it contains the contract that was made for the sale of that house. If by chance the ones to whom the envelope is addressed are dead, write to those persons you mention so that they might carry out the negotiations. And if the letters are delivered to the one to whom they are addressed, they could also look into the matter, and perhaps they will do so with more enthusiasm than the addressee would and take care to send us a prompt answer, something very important for us. You must then urge them to do this and add the enclosed copy of the contract to the letters you write. If it is necessary to give one to each of them, make further copies to go with each letter, and you and the sisters pray to God that they arrive there and that this business will be brought to a conclusion.
5. In what you say about the money for the chapel, don't be distressed if you cannot send it so quickly, for I wrote only in regard to the use for which it is meant.
6. I also received with yours the letter from the Indies. Be sure also that this letter enclosed for my nephew Don Lorencio is sent to him with care.
7. Best regards to Mother Subprioress and the sisters, and I am happy that they now are all well. They should know that they were not the worst off, considering what has occurred here and how long the illnesses have lasted. I still have not recovered completely.
8. The letter addressed to Lorencio mustn't go with the packet, because the one place is far away from the other, but you must find someone who is going to that city, or province, or I don't know what. Be careful, daughter, to carry out these tasks with all due regard. In the packet is enclosed another record of the agreement made regarding the house. You couldn't imagine what those nuns suffer and the trials they have had. Write to Don Lorencio at the address he will mention when he writes that he should write to you at the house of St. Joseph, for perhaps he doesn't remember, and that my brother left orders that, with the money you owe him, a chapel is to be built at St. Joseph's where he is interred. You mustn't send the money to Don Francisco but to me, for I will have him give a receipt. I fear he might spend the money on something else, especially now that he is married. I wouldn't for anything want to be a cause of worry for you, but try to get some of the postulants who are entering there, as our padre tells us, to give the money. I wish you had a larger orchard so that Beatriz could be more occupied. I can't accept those excuses, for she cannot deceive God, and her soul will pay for it. In the presence of all the nuns she gave false testimony and did many other things that they wrote me about; either they are telling the truth or she is.
9. Give my best regards to Rodrigo Alvarez and to the good prior of Las Cuevas. Oh what pleasure you give me by showing him kindness. Best wishes to the good Serrano and to all my daughters.
May God watch over you for me.
Don't forget to ask about the rhubarb, for it is something that has been tested.
Today is the last day of the Christmas feast.
Your reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus
