For mi padre maestro, Juan de Jesús Roca, Pastrana.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. Every time you tell me that you are well, it makes me very happy. God be praised who grants us so many favors. I would like to serve you by trying to get the letter you mention from the archbishop, but you should know that I have never spoken either at length or even briefly with his sister, nor do I know her. And you already know what little attention the archbishop paid to my letter when you gave me the task to write him at the time you were planning to go to Rome. I am very averse to insisting if nothing will be gained thereby, especially since we will be asking shortly for his permission to make a foundation in Madrid. I would like to do more than this for you to whom we owe so much, but truly I don't see how.
2. Regarding what you tell me about the constitutions, Padre Gracián wrote me that they said the same thing to him as they did to you, and he has there with him the remarks of the nuns. The things that need to be noted are so few that the response can be given quickly, but it was necessary to be in contact about them with both of you. What seems fitting to me on the one hand seems full of drawbacks on the other, and so I cannot come to a decision. It is very necessary to have everything set so that on our part there won't be any delay.
3. Now Señor Casademonte wrote me that he was given orders by someone in authority not to allow Tostado to have anything to do with the discalced Carmelites, which is very good. The care this friend of yours takes to give us any good news and keep us informed about everything is extraordinary. We certainly owe him a great deal.
4. The dowry which you say that aspirant has seems little to me, for it consists in a property that could perhaps be worth much less when sold, and then paid for late and poorly. So I have decided against her going to Villanueva for they have greater need of money there and have more nuns than I would wish. Padre Fray Gabriel has written me about a relative of his whom it would be more fitting for us to accept even though she doesn't have as much, for we owe him a great deal. When I wrote about that sister, they had not brought me the letter that speaks of the other aspirant. Don't consider the matter any further, for down there they will find the one who is most suited in their case. If they are going to put a burden on the house, it is better that they take someone from their own town.
5. We left Valladolid on the feast of the Holy Innocents for this foundation in Palencia. The first Mass was said on the feast of King David (in great secrecy because we thought there might be some opposition). And the good bishop here, Don Alvaro, had arranged everything so well that there was not only no objection but no one in the city who fails to rejoice in the fact, certain that our presence here will draw down God's favor on them. It is the most unusual thing I've ever seen. I would have thought this to be a bad sign if I hadn't remembered the previous opposition of many down there who thought it would not be good for us to come here. And so I was very remiss about coming until the Lord gave me little light and more faith. I think it will be one of the best of the houses that were founded and more fervent, for we bought the house next to a shrine to our Lady in the best section of the city. The people there and in all the surrounding region have the greatest devotion to her. The chapter has allowed us to have a grille looking into the church, something seen as a special favor. Everything is done by the bishop. What this order owes him and the care he shows over its concerns are indescribable. He gives us the bread we need.
6. Now we are staying in a house that a gentleman had given to Padre Gracián when he was here. Soon, with God's favor, we will move to our own. I tell you that you will rejoice to see the conveniences that are here. God be praised for everything.
7. The archbishop has already given me permission to make a foundation in Burgos. In finishing this one here, if the Lord be served, a foundation will be made there, for it would be too far to come all the way back here from Madrid, and I also fear that Father Vicar would not give permission for Madrid. And I would like it if our dispatch arrived first. It's appropriate that we will be there where it gets so cold at the coldest time and where it gets so hot at the hottest time and thus have something to suffer, and afterward be criticized by Padre Nicolao, which really amused me because he has more than enough reasons for doing so.
8. In your charity give him this letter so that he has news of this foundation and both of you may praise our Lord. I would tell you everything about what is going on here so as to stir your devotion, but I am getting tired. The shrine has two endowed Masses every day and many other Masses that are said there. So many people ordinarily visit it that we have been finding this somewhat difficult.
9. In your charity, if you find some messenger there for Villanueva send them news about how this foundation was made. Madre Inés de Jesús worked very hard. I am no help now with anything except for the noise that the name Teresa of Jesus makes.
10. Give my best regards to Madre Inés, and I send them to all those brothers of mine.
Tomorrow is the vigil of Epiphany.
11. In your charity pray for three canons who took it upon themselves to help us, for one especially, who is a saint named Reinoso, and for the bishop.
12. All the important people favor us very much, the fact is that the joy of all the people in general is extraordinary. I don't know where it will all end.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
