1. Jesus, Mary. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter, amen. You show me much charity with your letters. I answered them all before I left Valladolid, sending you also the documentation regarding Salamanca. I think that by the time this letter arrives you will have the documentation. We need all the care that you are taking so that the response will arrive in time. May God who sees our need bring this about, and may he give you the health I desire for you. You don't mention how your health is in this letter of yours. And that is wrong, for you know how worried I am. Please God you are better.
2. We were delighted with what the elderly ladies are saying about our padre, and I praise God for the fruitfulness of his sermons and holiness. His holiness is such that I am not surprised by the effect he has on those souls. Write to me about this, for it makes me very happy to know of these things. May God watch over him, as is our need. And you are right in saying that he must cut down on his preaching, for giving so many sermons could do him harm.
3. With regard to the two hundred ducats you say you must send me, I would be happy to receive them because we are beginning to carry out the orders my brother left (may he be in glory). But don't send the money to Casademonte or forward it through Padre Nicolao -- these words are meant only for you -- for he might use it there and I would be left in need here. But send the money to Medina del Campo if the sisters there know some merchant to whom you may send a letter of credit. This is the safest way to send the money and would not cost anything. If this is not possible, then try Valladolid, and if that isn't either, then let me know before you send it so that I may tell you how it should be sent.
4. I am getting along fairly well, but I am so busy with visits that although I had wanted to write this myself, I wasn't able to.
5. Enclosed is an account of the events surrounding this foundation, for it makes me praise God to see what is happening and the charity, goodwill, and devotion of this city. May God be given thanks; and have all the sisters thank God for the favor he shows us, and give them my best regards. The sisters here recommend themselves to your prayers, especially the secretary; it consoled her greatly to know that you are well disposed toward praying for her, for she is in great need.
6. I am writing to our padre to let him know the reason why I want this money sent directly to me. I have gotten so tired of relatives after my brother's death that I don't want any arguments with them. I tell you I am distressed over the famine that our padre tells me is going on in that region, for I don't know how you are living; and I'm also distressed that you have to send this money now. I would rather have it given to you. May God provide a remedy and give you health, for with good health one can put up with anything; but seeing you with little health and in need, is an affliction for me. I fear that the climate down there is bad for you, and I don't know how you could leave. May God provide the means, for he has certainly heard your prayers for trials.
7. Tell Sister San Francisco that it never enters my mind now to be displeased with her, but I am so pleased that it grieves me to see her so far away. My best regards to all the sisters and to Mother Subprioress. And remain with God, for this head of mine forces me to be brief. Otherwise I would have to scold you, for what you say to Padre Nicolao made me laugh. On the one hand I see that you need to accept nuns; on the other hand, we have experience here of all the trouble that comes when the numbers are not kept small and of the inconveniences that arise for many reasons. May God bring us someone like the one who died -- which would settle matters -- and watch over you.
Today is the feast of the Epiphany.
8. The letters for the Indies I sent with the previous mail. They tell me that Fray García de Toledo, to whom they are addressed, is returning. And so it is necessary that you entrust this packet to someone down there, in the event that Luis de Tapia (for some are addressed also to him) has died.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
