1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor, my sister. I have had the strongest desire to know how you are and how your Christmas was. Believe me, many a Christmas has gone by in which I never have had you and your household so much in mind as this year, recommending you all to our Lord and even grieving over your trials. May he be blessed who did not come into this world for any other reason than to suffer. And since I understand that whoever best follows his example in suffering, keeping his commandments, will have the more glory, I feel greatly consoled; although I would prefer to suffer your trials myself and let you have the reward, or be where I could more easily spend time with you. But, since the Lord ordains otherwise, may he be blessed for everything.
2. On the feast of the Holy Innocents, I set out from Valladolid with my companions in the midst of harsh weather for this city of Palencia. But my health is no worse, although the usual ailments are not lacking. When there is no fever, however, one can put up with them.
3. Two days after our arrival, I installed the bell at night, and a monastery of the glorious St. Joseph was founded. The happiness of all the people here was so great I was amazed. I think this is partly due to the fact that they see they are thereby pleasing the bishop, for he is much loved here and he favors us. Things are proceeding in such a way that I have hope in God this will be among the best of our houses.
4. I have no other news of Don Francisco than that his mother-in-law wrote a little while ago saying he had to be bled twice. She is very happy with him, and he with both of them. Pedro de Ahumada must be the least happy, according to what he has written to me. For Don Francisco seems to want to live with his mother-in-law, and it is not possible for Pedro de Ahumada to join them. It's a pity that he cannot be at rest anywhere. He wrote to me that he was now well and that he was going to Avila for the Epiphany to find out how to collect the money from Seville, since they are not giving him anything. The more those in Madrid inform me about this marriage, the more reason I see for us to be happy, especially over all they say of the discretion and pleasing manner of Doña Orofrisia. May God protect them and give them the grace to serve him, for all earthly consolations pass away quickly.
5. If you send the letter to Mother Prioress in Alba to forward to Salamanca it will surely arrive here, for there is a regular mail delivery. For goodness' sake don't neglect to write to me; you owe it to me these days, for I have had you all on my mind more than I would like.
6. Let Señor Juan de Ovalle consider this letter as addressed also to him -- I would like to know how he is getting along. Regards to Señora Doña Beatriz. May God watch over you all and make you as holy as I beg of him, amen.
Today is 13 January.
7. Don't fail to write to Don Francisco, which would be appropriate. He is not to blame for having failed to inform you of his marriage; it came about in such a way that there wasn't time. Madre Inés de Jesús is well and sends her best regards to all of you.
Your honor's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
