For Mother Prioress of St. Joseph's, Salamanca.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. I deeply regret having to take nuns from your house who please you, but this can't be helped; and since the one who is displeasing to you is also departing, have patience and pray for them all so that they may do well that which they are being called to do and that your house will not lose the good reputation brought to it by those who are leaving. I hope that will be so, for very good nuns are remaining with you.
2. It seems to me you are still going about with your infirmities. It is a great favor God grants us that you can stay on your feet; be careful, for the love of God. May it please him to let me see you finally out of that house, for I tell you it is a cause of much worry for me. His Majesty must desire that you suffer in every way. May he be praised for everything. And may His Majesty reward you for the limes. I had been so ill the day before that they were a delight to me, and also the veil; the one I was wearing I adapted for use as a larger one, for those you sent were lovely. Nonetheless, do me the charity not to send me anything unless I ask for it; I prefer that you spend the money on caring for yourself.
3. In this foundation everything is going so well that I don't know where it will end. Ask our Lord to give us a good house; we don't want the shrine. There are many houses, and they are good ones. Many people are looking after us, and the bishop never stops doing us favors. In your charity pray to God for him and for those who are helping us.
4. Write a note to Fray Domingo, should I fail to write him, so that he will know about this foundation, although I will try to write. If I don't, give him my best regards.
5. I was most pleased to see the care you took to provide sisters, something that is not always done, and you did the right thing, especially with regard to Isabel de Jesús, who is so deserving. It seems she is happy.
6. Because she and the others will tell you about everything else, and since I have other letters to write, I'll say no more than ask our Lord to watch over you for me and give you all the holiness I beg of him, amen. The missals are very nice and you sent so much that I don't know when we will be able to pay for it.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
Padre Maestro Díaz will give the enclosed letters to my Dominican fathers; you can give them to him.
