1. ... Macario, for I don't think he knows how to conceal his temptation. I believe it is very important for that house of nuns that Fray Gabriel should remain in La Roda. I have already written to you about this. He has bought another house for them -- they say it is a very good one -- in the middle of the town. I am concerned, for I don't think it has any views or land. Would you inquire about Macario as though on your own initiative, and be kind to him, for he is a good man and has admirable qualities. If he is somewhat unpleasant toward you, I think it is because he is jealous and thinks you have more regard for others than for him.
2. It has also occurred to me that if you should remain as provincial you ought to chose Padre Nicolao as your companion. For it will be very important in these beginnings that you go about together, although I am not going to say this to the commissary. Since Padre Fray Bartolomé is so sick that he has to eat meat, some are already looking askance at him. At least in these beginning stages, Padre Nicolao, I tell you, would be the right one, and he has good advice to give in all matters. After having suffered so much from others you will enjoy not having anything to suffer from him.
3. Give my best regards to Padre Fray Bartolomé, who I believe must be very tired because of the way you live, never allowing yourself to rest. It is enough to kill you and anyone who accompanies you. I remember well the bad color of your face a year ago during Holy Week. For goodness' sake don't be in such a hurry to preach sermons this Lent, nor should you eat fish difficult to digest, for although you don't pay attention, it then makes you sick and the temptations come.
4. You should know that there is still talk about the chapel for Sancho de Avila and that there are learned men who think that despite the gift the right of inheritance remains. I really think there will be a lawsuit. I have said that no action should be taken on the matter until we have a provincial. I am mentioning this to you here -- even though it may seem out of place -- because it will be necessary that you inform whoever will be provincial not to take any action without going there and to be very careful, for it is important for that house. Sancho Dávila is now giving more, and the nuns are in such need of the chapel that I think it is something that should be done. But the conditions and many other things should be looked into and studied with me.
5. Here things are getting better every day, thanks be to God. We are considering a very good house, for the one next to the shrine of our Lady was not suitable. And it was expensive, so we did not take it. This other one is in a very good location. I am feeling better than usual, and all the nuns are well. San Bartolomé and Inés de Jesús send their best regards. The latter says that however much you flee from the trial, you must believe that the prayers of the discalced nuns will prove efficacious and place you in the midst of it. May the Lord guide you to what will be of the greatest service to him; the rest matters little, even though painful.
6. I wanted to be brief, and look at the result. I don't know how to keep things short with you. I spoke a great deal with Mariano about his temptation to vote for Macario, for he wrote to me about it. I don't understand that man, nor do I want to talk about this matter with anyone other than you. So what I have written about this is for you alone; that's very important. And don't neglect to have recourse to Nicolao and to let them know that you don't want the task for yourself. And truly I don't know how in conscience a vote could be given to anyone of those who will be there other than to either of you two.
7. I have already sent your letter to the monasteries. All of them are elated, and I even more so. I will send you their comments. If you receive messages from other places, accept the suggestions that seem worthwhile to you; otherwise there is no need to act on them.
May God watch over you and make you as holy as I beg of him, amen.
Today is 17 February.
8. If we should think of anything else regarding these houses, I will inform you. Surely the work of the chapter will not be over so quickly as to make this impossible.
Your Reverence's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
