1. Jesus be with your reverence, amen. From this letter you will see what is going on in Alba with its foundress. The nuns have begun to fear her, and she has made them take in postulants. They must be in great need. I don't see any way of reasoning with her. You will have to inquire about everything.
2. Don't forget to leave orders everywhere about veils and to explain which persons the constitutions are referring to. And this should be done so that the constitutions don't seem stricter than they are. I fear more the nuns' loss of the great joy in which our Lord is leading them than those other things. I know what a discontented nun is. As long as they continue on as they have in the past, there is no reason to restrict them to more than to what they promised.
3. There is no reason why the confessors should see them with faces unveiled, or the friars of any order, and much less our own discalced friars. You could explain how in the case of an uncle who has care of them, if they have no living father, or that of some close relative, they would have a reason for doing so. Or for a duchess or countess or some eminent person; in sum, where there would be no danger but benefit. And without a reason of this sort, the curtain should not be drawn back. If some other occasion should arise over which there is doubt, permission should be asked from the provincial; otherwise it should never be done. But I fear lest the provincial give it easily. It seems that spiritual guidance could be carried on without having to draw back the curtain. You can look into this.
4. I have a great desire that some postulant will come to Alba bringing enough to pay something of what has been spent on the construction. May God direct things according to need. Here the nuns are doing well, for they have more than they need in everything. I mean exteriorly because for inner happiness these things are of little use; more of that is found in poverty. May His Majesty give us such understanding, and may he make you very holy, amen.
Your reverence's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
