1. I consider it very important that vicars not also be confessors to the nuns, and this should be always so. It is imperative for these houses that the nuns have the friars as confessors, as you say and I myself see. I would support having things remain as they are rather than grant that each confessor be also the vicar. There are so many drawbacks to this, as I will explain to you when I see you. I beg you to trust me in this matter, for when St. Joseph's was founded much attention was given to it. And one of the reasons it seemed to some persons, myself included, that it was good that the monastery be subject to the bishop was to avoid this practice. There are serious disadvantages that result from it, as I have learned. And for me one is enough: I have seen clearly that if the vicar likes some nun, the prioress cannot prevent him from talking to her as much as he wants, for he is the superior. This can result in a thousand woes.
2. For this reason, and for many others, it is also necessary that they not be subject to the priors. It will happen that someone who doesn't know much will give orders that are disturbing to all the nuns. There won't be anyone like mi padre Gracián, and since we have so much experience, we have to look ahead and remove the risks. The greatest good that can be done for these nuns is that no talking with the confessor take place other than what is necessary for the confession of sins. As for safeguarding the recollection of the monastery, it is enough that the confessor inform the provincial.
3. I have said all this in case someone else or Father Commissary may think otherwise. But I don't believe this will happen, for in his order the nuns in many places have confessors who are not their vicars. Our entire existence depends on our keeping out these wicked devotees, destroyers of the brides of Christ. It is necessary always to think of the worst that can happen in order to remove this occasion of sin, for the devil enters here without our realizing it. This is what can do us harm and that I always fear -- as well as our taking in too large a number of nuns. So I beg you to insist that these two things remain firmly fixed in our constitutions. Do me this favor.
4. I don't know why you say we should be silent in regard to the friars being our confessors, for you see how bound we are by the constitutions of Padre Fray Pedro Fernández, and I confess that it is necessary that we be so. Nor do I understand why you must not speak about matters concerning us. I tell you that I have so stressed in my letter the benefit we derive from your visitations -- and this is true -- that you can readily discuss anything you like in order to help us. You really owe this to these nuns, for you cost them many tears. I would prefer that no one speak of these matters but you and Padre Nicolao, for it is not necessary that our constitutions or that which you ordain for us be dealt with in the chapter or that the others be informed of them. Only between ourselves did Padre Fernández (may he be in glory) and I discuss these matters. And even though some of the eight things that I set down at the beginning seem unimportant, you should realize that they are very important. So, I would not want you to remove any of them. In what regards nuns I can have a say, for I have seen many things
5. You should know that I wanted to arrange to ask Father Prior and the commissary to appoint masters and presentados from those among you who are qualified. This is necessary for some matters and so as not to need to have recourse to the general. But since you say that the commissary has no further authority than to assist at the chapter and draw up constitutions, I let the matter go.
6. It seems they have not granted all that was asked for. It would have been good if they had and done away for some years with any need for us to have recourse to Rome. It will be necessary that you write at once to the general, giving him an account of what is taking place. The letter should be a humble one, submitting to him as his subjects, which is right. And you should write as well to Fray Angel -- for you owe it to him -- thanking him for the good things he has done for you and asking him to always consider you his son; and be sure to do this!
7. Now let us deal with what you say of your wish not to be elected or confirmed; in this regard I am writing to Father Commissary. You should know, mi padre, that regarding the desire I have had to see you free, I clearly understand that the love I have for you in the Lord is much more at work than the good of the order. From this proceeds a natural weakness that causes me to suffer greatly in seeing that not all understand how much they owe you and how much you have labored; I cannot bear to hear even a word spoken against you. But in considering what could result from this, I see that the general good carries more weight. If, however, Padre Nicolao were elected and then always accompanied by you, I think both wishes could be satisfied. But I truly believe that for this first time it would be better in all respects for you to hold the office, and so I am telling this to Father Commissary. And if this cannot be, then Padre Nicolao accompanied by you would be best because of your experience and knowledge of your subjects, both the friars and the nuns. I tell you that it is for his lack of experience that we consider Macario unsuited to the task. I am giving you good reasons for it all, and I tell you that Padre Fray Pedro Fernández thought this as well, although he did desire very much Macario's election for reasons valid at that time. But now -- the damage he would do!
8. I also included the name of Padre Fray Juan de Jesús so that it wouldn't seem that I am limiting myself to only two; although I told the truth in saying that Padre Juan de Jesús didn't have the gift of governing -- since in my opinion he doesn't -- but that if he had one of the other two for his companion he could pass, for he listens to reason and would take counsel. And so I believe that if you went around with him, he would in no way distance himself from what you tell him; thus I believe he would do well. But I am sure he would not receive the votes. May God so direct things that whatever is for his greater honor and glory will come about, which is what I hope for, seeing that he has already done the greater part. It is a great pity ...
