1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with you, mi padre. I received the letter you wrote me from Alcalá and was delighted with all that you told me in it, especially that you are in good health. May God be praised, for he shows me great mercy after so many travels and so much work. I am well.
2. I have written to you by two different routes and sent my recommendations to give the appearance of being somebody. I had forgotten what I have now mentioned in the enclosed letter to Father Commissary. You may read it. So as not to tire myself by writing it out again I am sending you the letter without sealing it. Seal it with a seal that looks like mine, and give it to him.
3. The prioress of Segovia has reminded me of the freedom we have to invite preachers from outside the order. I had omitted this, thinking that it was already a given. But, mi padre, we must not consider those who are living at present, but at a later time some persons could come along who in being made superiors will oppose such freedom and many other things. So do us the favor to strive that this and what I wrote the other day be clearly understood and established through the commissary's authority. For if this isn't done, one will have to have recourse to Rome. I understand the great importance this has for these nuns and their consolation, and how disconsolate they become in other monasteries when held spiritually bound. Souls that are restrained cannot serve God well, and the devil uses this restraint to tempt them. But when they have some freedom, they often pay no attention to it and make no use of it.
4. If Father Commissary can amend the constitutions and add to them, I would like to see things removed and added in accordance with what we are now requesting. And no one will do this unless you and Padre Nicolao take it very much to heart. As you say and I believe I wrote in my letter to you, the friars should not have a say in our affairs, nor did Padre Fray Pedro Fernández give them any. Between the two of us we came to an agreement about the decrees he set down, and he didn't do anything without telling me about it. I am grateful to him for this.
5. If it be possible to make new constitutions or remove and add, remember in regard to the "stockings of rough wool or cloth made from rough tow" that nothing be specified or said more than that they should wear stockings so that the nuns won't be having scruples. And where it says "the toques should be made of fine tow" say "linen." And if you think it appropriate, remove the decree made by Padre Fray Pedro Fernández where he says that they should not eat eggs or have bread for collation. I could never succeed in getting him not to do this. It is enough for the nuns to satisfy the obligation of the church without adding anything, for they become scrupulous and it does them harm. For some don't think they have a need when they do.
6. They have told us that the general chapter has now ordained many things about the prayers we recite and that we should have two ferias each week. If possible, put it down that we are not obliged to make so many changes, but that we can continue praying as we do now.
Also remember the many drawbacks to having discalced Carmelite friars living in one of the monasteries of the other Carmelites. If possible, say that when the discalced Carmelites have a place where they can stay in a completely edifying way, they don't have to reside in a monastery of the order.
7. Our constitutions say that our monasteries should be founded in poverty and not have an income. Since I now see that they are all on the way to having an income, consider if it would not be better to remove this and anything else in the constitutions that might refer to it so that no one on seeing them will think our monasteries have grown lax so quickly. Or, Father Commissary could say that since the council gives permission for an income, we should allow for one.
8. I would like to have these constitutions put into print, for different renderings of them are going about. There are prioresses who when copying them -- and without thinking they are doing anything wrong -- add or delete whatever they like. A strict, unmistakable precept should be set down against deleting or adding to the constitutions. In all these little things do what seems best to you, I mean in dealing with what concerns us. Also Padre Nicolao should be involved so that it doesn't seem that you are doing this on your own; and even Padre Juan de Jesús, I believe, will consider kindly what concerns us. I would like to enlarge, but it's almost nightfall and they will be coming to get the letters, and I must still write to some friends.
9. I was deeply moved by what you promised to be for the discalced Carmelite nuns if elected provincial. At least you will be a true father, and they will certainly be grateful to you. And if you were to live for ever and they were to deal with no one else, there would be no need to be making some of these requests. How anxious they are for you to become provincial. I don't think anything else will satisfy them. May God watch over you for us. All the nuns ask for your prayers.
Today is 21 February.
Your paternity's true daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
10. They brought me the enclosed recommendations. When they send me the others, I will forward them. I don't know if they are acceptable, but it was indeed necessary for you to say that they should pass through my hands. May God keep you. Only the recommendation made by your friend Isabel de Santo Domingo was well done, and I am sending it as is.
