1. Jesus be with your reverence, mi padre. I realize that you have little time now for reading letters. Please God I will know how to be brief with this.
2. Here are the recommendations that were lacking. You did well in saying that they should be sent here first along with the nuns' requests, for those from the nuns at St. Joseph's in Avila are such that there would be no longer a difference between them and the nuns at the Incarnation. I am frightened by what the devil is doing, and it is the confessor who is most to blame, despite his being so good. But he has always had it in his head that the nuns should eat meat, and this was one of the requests they made. Imagine that!
3. It has caused me much distress to see how that house has strayed and it will take a great deal of effort to get it to return to its true state, even though there are very good nuns in it. And to add to this, they are asking Father Provincial, Fray Angel, to allow some nuns who have poor health to keep something in their cells to eat. And they are asking him in such a way that I wouldn't be surprised if he gave it to them. You can guess who encouraged them to ask Fray Angel! This is the way things get started, and little by little everything deteriorates. Such is the reason for the prescription at my request that superiors not be allowed to give the nuns permission to keep anything in their cells. It is necessary that this prescription have some force to it, even when a nun is sick. In that case the infirmarian can leave something at night for the one who has need. And there should be the greatest charity about this when the sickness calls for it.
4. I forgot to mention this, but others who have written reminded me: your chapter should decide on the prayers the friars should say for a nun when she dies. We will do the same, for they only recite prayers, and so far, I think, do not say Mass for us. What they do here is offer a sung Mass and an office for the dead recited by the community. I think this comes from the old constitutions, for this is what was done at the Incarnation.
5. Don't forget this. And also consider whether we have an obligation to observe the motu proprio that we not to go into the church, not even to lock the door. This is what should be done when possible, for it is the safest thing to do even if the pope hadn't given the orders. It is better that it be set down now, and where it is not possible because the house is just beginning that it be followed in the future. But I believe it will be followed in all our houses, for they now know that they must not do otherwise. Don't neglect to do this, for goodness' sake. In Toledo they have already locked the door that leads into the church, as well as in Segovia -- without even telling me -- and these two prioresses are servants of God and cautious. And since I am neither, I want them to keep me attentive. Well, this is done in all enclosed monasteries.
6. Regarding the request I made that those who set out for a new foundation remain there, unless they hold the office of prioress in their own house: the statement is too short. Do me the favor of adding "or for some other important reason."
7. I believe I have already asked you to put the constitutions and all the acts of the apostolic visitators together, which would be good. For since the two make some contradictory statements in certain matters, the nuns who are less educated get confused. Although you have a lot to do, be careful, for the love of God, to take the time to make things plain and clear. Since I have written to you about this in so many letters, I fear lest you find yourself swamped in words and forget the better part.
8. Since you have not informed me of having received any of my letters, I have the temptation to think the devil has plotted to prevent the substance of my notes to reach you as well as the letters I wrote to Father Commissary. If this should be so, would you send me a private courier at once, and I will repay you, for it would be terrible if you didn't receive them. I truly believe this is a temptation because the courier here is a good friend of ours, and he recommended that the bundle be delivered with great care.
9. You should know I have been informed that some of those voting want Padre Macario to be elected. If God does this after so much prayer, it will be for the best; his judgments are his own. One of those who now tell me this was, from what I saw, inclined to vote for Padre Nicolao, and if they change they will vote for him. May God direct it all and watch over you. However badly things might go, what is essential at any rate has been accomplished. May he be praised forever.
10. I would like it if you wrote down on a separate piece of paper the important points of what I wrote you and burn my letters, for in the midst of all that confusion someone might chance upon one of them, and that would be terrible.
11. All the sisters here send their best regards, especially my companions.
Tomorrow is the last day of the month. I believe today is the 27th.
We are doing well here, and each day gets better. We have begun negotiations for a house in a very good location. I have been wanting to be free of my duties here so as not to be so far away.
12. See that you do not place any obstacle in the way of the foundation at St. Alexis. For the present, even though it may be a little far away, they will not find so good a site. It pleased me very much when I passed by there, and that woman paid with her tears. I would like this monastery to be the first, and then the one in Salamanca, for they are good places. They shouldn't think they can be choosy before making the foundation, for they don't have any money. Afterward God will provide. In Salamanca, houses are worth their weight in gold. We don't know what to do about finding one for the nuns. Believe me, for goodness' sake, for I have experience. And, as I say, God will bring everything to a good end. Even though you have only a little nook, it is important in a place like that to get started. May His Majesty bring everything to the conclusion necessary for his service, amen.
Your paternity's unworthy subject and servant,
Teresa of Jesus
13. I would very much like to see this matter of St. Alexis attended to at once so that apart from the main reason for doing so you would be close by. But they cannot come until they have arranged to receive a license from the abbot. The bishop is on better terms with him, and his sister will give the guarantee. Tell those fathers for me that they ought to begin the negotiations, for if they spend a lot of time in the beginning looking for a good site, they will end up with nothing.
