1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your honor. If I had written you as was my desire, I would not have waited for the favor of your letter before writing to you -- I would have written several letters by now. But I have had so many to write these days and so much business to tend to, along with the setting up of a province and my poor health, that I don't know how I kept my head.
2. Mother Prioress, María Bautista, has written me of your joy over the favor God has shown us in regard to our becoming a separate province. And it wasn't necessary for her to do so. I already know that even if this favor didn't concern those who are such servants of yours, it would be enough that it have to do with the service of God for you to be happy, since you belong to his house and kingdom. I tell you this favor has brought me great relief, for it seems we will have peace from here on, which is a wonderful thing. And those who have begun this journey will not be impeded by having superiors so different from them, but they will have their own superiors who will understand what they must do. May he be blessed forever.
3. I don't know when I will be able to see that you have something that brings you happiness. It seems to me that God wants to hold everything back so that your happiness will be greater in that eternity that will have no end. And your poor health is not the least of your trials. Now, since the good weather is coming, perhaps you will feel some improvement. May the Lord bring this about as he can. Once that pain in my side left me, I have felt better, but I don't know how long this will last.
4. Here, things are going very well, and with each day one understands better how right it was to make this foundation here. The people are charitable and straightforward, without duplicity, which I like very much. And the bishop (God watch over him) is just right for us; it is unusual the way he favors us. I ask you to remember him at times in your prayers to our Lord.
5. You have honored us greatly with the statue you donated, which stands alone on the main altar, and it is so well-done and large that there is no need for others.
6. We brought a very good prioress here, and nuns that, in my opinion, are also very good. So, the house seems as though it was founded a good time ago. Nonetheless, regarding matters of the soul, I feel alone, for there is no one here that I know from the Society. Truly, I feel alone everywhere, because before, even when our saint was far away, it seems he was a companion to me, because he still communicated with me through letters. Well, we are in exile, and it is good that we feel this life to be one.
7. What do you think of how honorably Fray Domingo Báñez managed to receive his chair? May it please God to watch over him, for there aren't many left like him. There will be no lack of work with this, for it is a very costly honor.
8. I beg you to give Señora Doña María my best regards. I long to see her in good health, but my prayers are of no value except to add to people's trials. You can see for yourself whether this is not true.
9. I beg you to tell Padre García Manrique, if he is there, that I would like very much to have him here, and not to forget me in his prayers.
10. We never succeed in buying this house, and I certainly desire to do so, for if God be served, I would like to go to Burgos, since the good weather is coming, so as to return quickly and have more time to stay with you.
11. May His Majesty work this out, as he can, and give you much spiritual consolation during this holy time, since you are so far it seems from having any temporal consolation. I kiss the hands of Señor Don Luis. I beg God to make him very holy.
From this house of St. Joseph's. Today is 4 March.
Your unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
