1. ... not to displease the prioress because her nuns are very much in accord, and she wouldn't want to introduce a note of discord. In Medina there are many melancholic nuns. But her presence would be disturbing anywhere; and I am not surprised. Although, in the end, the nuns are supposed to help one another, it doesn't seem appropriate for a foundation just beginning. I was thinking of bringing her to Burgos, not as foundress but as a penitent, for if God wills that a foundation be made there, I plan to leave Inés de Jesús as prioress. She would much prefer to go there than to Madrid, although she dislikes being prioress anywhere. And the subprioress in Valladolid can go as subprioress. This will be pleasing to them both. And, after all, these two know her and will proceed prudently, but Inés de Jesús will find it very difficult. For love of God, think of what might be the best solution, for it is necessary to prescribe a remedy at once before she's lost. She hasn't left her cell, nor would it be good if she did.
2. Because I believe you will have many things to do, I don't think it would be wise for me to go on at length, and for the same reason I have not allowed Mother Prioress to write to you. Carry on as though you have received that letter. She sends her best regards, and I send mine to Padre Mariano and all the others.
3. If you go to Madrid I would like you to do me the favor of going to see Don Francisco and his wife since he would not dare, being so timid, go to see you. He has written to me of how happy he is for having done what he did. You could encourage him in the service of God and not let it seem that because he gave up on being a friar you are disgusted with him. Because of poor management on his part, I think he is going to suffer a great loss, and I tell you that the marriage is not a good one. I would love to withdraw from all of them, but the mother-in-law has befriended me and is asking me things I am obliged to answer, which is very wearisome to me. But he was running the risk of total ruin because she learned that he was receiving an income of two thousand ducats. I told her the truth so that they will be careful about what they are spending. Padre Fray Angel went to see them at once without my asking him, and so it will seem, as I say, ill-will on your part not to pay him a visit. May our Lord watch over you.
4. See that you do not fail to write me -- you know what a comfort your letters are for me -- and at length; tell me how Macario has been, and tear this letter up.
5. We have not yet managed to buy the house; we are in the process of doing so. I have brought two lay sisters without any other authorization than my patent letters -- for this is what I usually did so as not to have to ask someone who would be presiding for so short a time. I praise God greatly that he is as good as you say and has done everything so well.
Today is 12 March.
Your reverence's servant, daughter, and subject -- and how willingly!
Teresa of Jesus
6. I am doing well, except for the usual ailments. I cannot find Juliana's letter. It is all about her not wanting to return to the Incarnation, for she thinks it would amount to regressing. If she wrote, it is because she thought the prioress and I wanted her to return. There is no need to pay any attention to what she says.
