1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I have received a letter from you and would have written you more often if I had paid heed to my desires. But the workload and business matters these past years were such that I had a hard time attending to everything. Glory to God who has brought us out of it all successfully.
2. As Mother Prioress will tell you, I praise God because you are so happy with the state in life that he has given you. May it please him that, since there are saints in that state just as there are in others, you will become one if you do not lose the opportunity through your own fault.
3. Any complaint that I might have against you in those other matters is that you did not let me know as soon as you yourself knew. Perhaps we would have been able to avoid any negligence and prevent all the evil the devil brought about by making one believe that the evil was really there. And even if everything that woman imagined were true, being who she is, one would have had to behave differently and not engage in such unrestrained defamation. When God does the judging we will understand what we cannot judge here below without offending him greatly, for where such great friendship existed, and for so long a time, there was no reason, unless through malice, for such a heavy condemnation.
4. My sister's demeanor with everyone is so gentle that it doesn't seem she could be harsh with anyone, for she is gentle by nature. Nor have I ever seen in her daughter any rudeness of the kind that would make it necessary for my sister to be harsh, but only a great deal of calm. Truly, I have not seen them often, but I have shared a great part of the pain for the offenses that must have been committed before God by the one who so perverted the truth. My sister swears up and down that it is a calumny, and I believe it because my sister is not a liar, nor would anyone in that place have any reason to treat her badly. But her poverty is the reason they all hold her in so little esteem. God allows it that she might suffer in every way, for truly she is a martyr in this life. May God give her patience.
5. I tell you that if it were up to me, since it's a matter of calumny, I would remove the occasion. But I could at least help them through prayer, if my prayers were of any value. I am so wretched, however, that they do no more good than what you see. Nor was it any good for me to be your servant so that you would, as I said, tell me about this at once. When you say that I am no longer the way I used to be, I don't know what you can base this on, for nothing that concerns you fails to concern me, and I do with words what I cannot do with works -- speak of your merits -- and this is all true. You are the one who has drifted from me, in such a manner that it surprises me. The truth is, I don't deserve any more.
6. Mother Prioress has written me that you said you had agreed with me on the dowry for that little angel they have in their house. If this is so, I don't remember anything more than that you told me that everything you had you wanted for her and that you could give her seven hundred ducats free of entailments. And I remember this because with the desire I had to serve you, I was delighted that the dowry would be so good that Father Visitator (who was then Padre Gracián) would want to give the permission. So I wrote to him, urging him as much as I could, for apart from Casilda and Teresita and Padre Gracián's little sister, no child has been received in these houses, nor would I consent to this. I no longer have the power in all the houses that I used to have, for the decisions are made by a community vote. According to the constitutions that have been drawn up, the habit cannot be given to anyone under twelve, nor can one make profession until the age of sixteen. So now the matter cannot even be considered.
7. Would you try to pay something on the cost for her food, for since you have other expenses, you cannot give whenever you want. They tell me that it is for I don't know how long that you haven't given them anything, and so they think that this is the way it will be with the dowry. Certainly if it were up to me I wouldn't bother you about this. May God give you the peace I desire, amen.
From St. Joseph's in Palencia on the last day of the Easter feast.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
