To the very illustrious Señora Doña Luisa de la Cerda.
My lady in Paracuellos,
1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be with your ladyship. Since I have been in this house of the Incarnation -- a little over three weeks now -- I have written you three times. I don't think any of my letters has reached you. I share so much in your trials that when this suffering is added to the many I have here, I'm no longer worrying about asking our Lord for any more. May he be blessed for everything, for it truly seems that you are among those who will enjoy his kingdom since he gives you to drink from the chalice through so many illnesses, both your own and of those you love.
2. I once read in a book that the reward for trials is the love of God. For so precious a return, who will not love them? So I beg you to do so and to note how all things pass away quickly; journey by detaching yourself from everything that does not last forever.
3. I had already learned that you were ill, and so today I have tried in every way to learn about your health. May the Lord be blessed that you have improved. Come away from that region, for the love of God, for it is clearly bad for the health of all. My health is good -- may he be blessed -- compared to what it usually is. But with all the work I have, I wouldn't be able to hold up without better health than I usually have. My responsibilities are so many and so pressing, inside and outside the house, that I have little time even to write this.
4. May our Lord repay you for your kindness and the consolation your letter brought me, for I tell you that I need some of this. Oh, my lady, as one who has known the calm of our houses and now finds herself in the midst of this pandemonium, I don't know how one can go on living, for everywhere there is suffering. Nonetheless, glory to God, there is peace, which is no small thing. Gradually I am taking away the nuns' diversions and freedom, for even though these nuns are so good -- certainly there is much virtue in this house -- changing a habit is death, as they say. They bear it well and show me much respect. But where there are 130 nuns, you will understand the care that is necessary to keep things in order. I am somewhat concerned about our own monasteries; but since I was obliged to come here under obedience, I hope that our Lord will not allow me to fail in my duty, but that he will care for them. It doesn't seem that my soul is disturbed in the midst of this whole Babylon, which I take to be a favor from the Lord. Human nature grows tired, but it is all little next to my offenses against the Lord.
5. I was sorry to learn of the death of the good Doña Juana. May God take her to himself, and indeed he will, for she was most worthy. I really don't know why we should feel sorry about those who depart for a safe haven, whom God draws out of this world with its dangers and instability. We are loving ourselves rather than those who go to enjoy a greater good. I commend myself to the prayers of my ladies.
6. I tell you that I keep you ever present and that it was not necessary for you to awaken me with your letter; I would rather be half asleep than see myself so imperfect as to fail to be afflicted over your sufferings. May our Lord give you eternal happiness and rest because for some time now you have given up happiness and rest in this life, though you do not yet appreciate the value of suffering. The day will come when you will understand what you have gained and that for nothing in the world should you ever want to lose it.
7. I'm very much consoled in knowing that my Padre Duarte is there. Now that I am not able to serve you, it brings me joy to know that you have so much good support to help you undergo your trials. The messenger is waiting, so I cannot go on any longer, save to kiss the hands of my ladies many times.
8. May our Lord lead you by his hand and take those fevers away quickly. May you be given the strength to please His Majesty in everything, as I beg of him, amen.
Written at the Incarnation in Avila, 7 November.
Your ladyship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
