1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, mi padre. Now do you see how short-lasting my happiness was? I was desiring to make this trip, and I believe I would have regretted to see it end, as happened at other times when I was in the company that I now thought would be mine. May God be praised, for already I seem to be growing tired. I tell you, mi padre, that, in the end, the flesh is weak and so has become sadder than I would want, for the sadness was great. Your departure could have been excused if you had stayed at least until seeing us move into our house, for eight days more or less didn't matter. There has been much loneliness here, and please God that he who was responsible for taking you away will act in a manner better than I fear he might. God deliver me from such urgency. And then he talks about us!
2. Truthfully, I have nothing good to say now, for I have little inclination to do so. The only comfort would be freedom from the fear that I could have, and have had, that they might touch me in what is my holy of holies. For I assure you the temptation I go through in this regard is a strong one. And in exchange for this not happening, I would suffer everything to come raining down on me -- and it is raining a lot now, so afflicted have I felt. Everything becomes very displeasing, for after all the soul suffers from not being with the one who governs and comforts it. May God be served through it all, and if this be so, there is no reason to complain however painful it may be.
3. You should know that when you were here I put off discussing something with you until your return -- which would have given me more time to pray over the matter. It concerned something that Padre Juan Díaz urgently recommended to me. And I felt very sorry afterward when I learned that you are not returning, because he came here for no other reason. He has about decided to change his state and enter either our order or the Jesuits. He says that after being here for some days he is leaning more toward this order and wants to know your opinion and mine and asks that we pray for him.
4. What I feel about this and what I told him is that it would be very good for him if he were to persevere. If he didn't it will be harmful, bringing discredit to the publications with which he is engaged. And so I say this now, although I am a little less fearful of it, because he serves our Lord very much and in the end will have to overcome many things; but he will end up well if he settles down in one order. He says that he will give the monastery where he enters all that he has from Maestro Avila. In my opinion, if it is like the little that was given to me to read, the sermons would be of great benefit to people who are not as knowledgeable as you are. He is a man who is edifying no matter where he is. We should think carefully about this. I will speak of it with Padre Nicolao. I have mentioned it here to you so that if he has not yet spoken to you about it, you will do me the charity of letting him know that I spoke of the matter with you. He would have reason to complain about me if I hadn't. And will you pray about this. Since you know him better than I do, you will understand what the appropriate answer for him would be, and let me know if you find a means of doing so, since even this will present another difficulty.
5. Enclosed is a letter to me by the Bishop of Osma, and a paper that I wrote; I didn't have time for more.
6. In my opinion, your reverence did not have to go to Alba without Padre Nicolao. He would have seen clearly into those intrigues and calculations about the alms left by the beneficiary. You did me a great favor by sending him (for no one could be better). You couldn't have sent some young lad, but it had to be someone who speaks and presents himself well. Oh, mi padre, praise be to God who made you so charming in the presence of those with whom you deal that no one seems to fill this void, for everything wearies poor Lorencia. She asks for your prayers. She says that there is no quiet or rest for her soul except in God and with anyone who understands her as you do. The rest is a cross for her beyond exaggeration.
7. San Bartolomé has been left very sad. She sends you her best regards. Give us your blessing and pray much for us to His Majesty.
May he watch over and guide you, amen.
8. You should know that there they also have a strange fear of the prioress and the custom of never saying anything about anything to the major superior. Regarding the students who serve them, you need to be careful. May God keep you.
Your reverence's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
