To the most illustrious Señor Licentiate Peña, confessor of the most illustrious Cardinal Archbishop of Toledo, my lord.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. The day after I sent a private messenger who had brought a letter for me from Señora Doña Luisa, they brought me your letter. I was very sorry because I would have wanted to answer at once and since there is no ordinary mail delivery in this place, I don't know when this letter will go out. I would have wanted it to go quickly so that you would be aware of how little I am at fault, or rather not at all, This is so true that out of respect for the relationship[3] of that person about whom you wrote to me with his illustrious lordship, I did not tell the latter about the efforts I made in this case to impede her entrance into one of these houses. If Padre Baltasar Alvarez, who was provincial of the Jesuits in this province, were alive, he would be a good witness to how I begged him to prevent such a thing, since this lady had more respect for him than for anyone else, and he promised to do so.
2. For some years now I have been standing in her way, and I don't think this is because his illustrious lordship is opposed to her entering, but out of fear that what happened in the case of another lady who entered one of our monasteries, leaving daughters behind, might happen to us. This was done without my approval, for I was far away from that city when she entered. I tell you that ten years of unrest and great trials have gone by (for she entered that long ago), and she is a good servant of God. But since the order of charity, which is obligatory, is not being observed, I think God allows her and her daughters to pay for such a failure, and the nuns as well. And I have mentioned it so much in these monasteries that I am certain the prioress in Medina becomes upset every time she thinks of what might happen. Consider how although this is true, the devil has found a way in which they can accuse me of the opposite.
3. Our Lord often finds a way of granting me joy in suffering calumnies, which have not been rare for me in this life, but this one in a way has caused me distress. For if I owed his lordship gratitude for nothing else than his having allowed me to kiss his hands there, that would be enough, but how much more do I owe him for so many favors; and in the case of some he does not know that I am aware of them. And knowing what his will is in this regard, I couldn't give my consent now to such a thing, unless I were out of my mind. It is true that sometimes, since this lady cries so much when I tell her many things so as to dissuade her, I may at times have given her some reasons for hope while trying to cheer her up, and perhaps she thought I was in favor of this, although I don't especially remember such a thing.
4. I certainly love her honor very much, and am indebted to her, and so -- leaving aside what concerns us -- if for my sins what I am speaking of should happen, I strongly desire that she succeed in everything. Yesterday I was told by the prioress of this house (who is from the monastery in Medina, for she is the one with whom this lady frequently communicated) that she had been told by her that the vow she had made to enter contained the condition that she would do so when she could and that if she were told it would be for the greater service of God that she not enter, she would renounce her desire. It seems to me that since she still has children to care for and her daughter-in-law is so young, she is not yet able to enter. If you think it appropriate, tell his lordship about this so that he will understand how the vow was made. Some learned men with whom she speaks disturb her, and the little they say to someone who is so holy is enough to do that.
5. If your letter had come before the one Señora Doña Luisa wrote me, in which she tells me that his lordship has been freed from any illusion about my being at fault in this matter, it would have pained me very much. Blessed be God who so favors me that without my understanding how his lordship has come to know the truth. Never in all my life would I have dreamed of excusing myself since I didn't think I was at fault. I kiss your honor's hands for having informed me of this. I consider it a special favor and consider myself newly obliged to serve you always more with my poor prayers, although up until now I have not failed to do so.
6. As regards the license for a foundation in Madrid, I have begged this of his most illustrious lordship because I think our Lord would be served thereby and because the discalced friars and nuns have urged me, for they say that it would be very useful for everyone to have a house there. But since his illustrious lordship stands in the place of God, I would feel no disturbance if he doesn't think it would be good to grant the permission. I would believe that accepting his denial would be of greater service to God, for I would not be refusing any trials; and I tell you there are many in every foundation.
7. What would be a great trial for me would be the thought that his illustrious lordship is displeased with me on account of calumnies uttered against me, for I love him tenderly in the Lord. And even if this doesn't matter to him, it is a consolation to me that he know the truth, for being loved doesn't matter to our Lord either, yet he is happy with this love alone. Truly, if love is present, it then shows itself in works and in not departing from his will. Through these works I cannot serve his illustrious lordship in any better way than by refusing to oppose him as much as I can. Be certain of this, and do not forget me in your holy sacrifices, as we have agreed.
8. Since you will learn of my travel plans from the Mother Prioress there, I will not mention them. I have better health here than usual, glory to God. It is a great comfort to me to know that his illustrious lordship is in good health. May God give you health, and the holiness I beg of him for you, amen.
From this monastery of the Holy Trinity in Soria, the end of June.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
