1. Jesus be with your honor. It seems as though you are in another world, living far off in that place. God deliver me from it and from this place as well, for almost from the time of my arrival I've had poor health. So as not to be telling you about this, I've preferred not to write. Before Christmas I suffered from fevers and a sore throat, and was bled and purged twice. Since before Epiphany I've been down with the quartan fevers, but I've not experienced any nausea; and on days when I've been free of them, I've been able to go to choir with the others and sometimes to the refectory. I don't think the fevers will last. Since I see the improvement the Lord has brought about in this house, I try not to stay in bed except when I have the fever, which lasts all night. The chills begin about two, but they are not excessive. Everything else is going well, with so many duties and troubles that I wonder how I'm able to bear them all. The biggest burden is letter-writing. I have written four times to the Indies, for the fleet is leaving.
2. I'm amazed by your indifference in seeing me with so many trials. I've been waiting each day for Señor Juan de Ovalle, who, I'm told, will be passing through here on his way to Madrid, for it is important to send my brother what he has requested. Now it's too late, nor do I know what to say. Everything should be easy for you; certainly it will not look well.
3. I've been told that Señor Juan de Ovalle and Señor Gonzalo de Ovalle are those who oppose giving a narrow passageway to the monastery. I can't believe it. I wouldn't want us to become involved in haggling. This doesn't look right for women, even though there may be a reason, and those lords would be greatly discredited, especially since the matter pertains to me. Furthermore, I don't think the nuns were aware of the reason; at least one should not turn their simplicity into a fault. Would you inform me about what is going on, for, as I say, this is the news that reached me, and it could be incorrect. Do not be sorry about my illness, for I don't think it will amount to anything; at least it is not interfering much with my duties, even though it does cost me somewhat.
4. I miss you here very much, and I find myself alone. I need some reales, for I don't take any food from the monastery provisions except bread; try to send me some. I kiss the hands of those lords and of Beatriz. I would be very happy to have her here. I already know that Gonzalo is well. May God watch over him. Agustín de Ahumada is with the viceroy; Fray García has written me about it. My brother has arranged marriages for two of his nieces -- and very good ones at that. They will be secure on his departure. The clock will soon strike twelve and I'm very tired so -- no more.
Yesterday was the feast of St. Blase; the day before, of our Lady.
Your honor's devoted servant,
Teresa of Jesus
