To the illustrious Señor Canon Reinoso, my lord. Palencia.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. A short time ago I wrote by way of Burgos to you and to Canon Señor Salinas. God deliver me from the roundabout ways that are necessary both to send a letter and to receive news about your honors. Please God you are well. I am fine and so are the sisters, and everything is going well for us.
2. Now I am writing quickly because they told me about a messenger that was going to Madrid. I am sending my letters by this way and am writing to the administrator asking him to have the chapter give Ribera, the procurator, permission for a stipend of twenty days in August -- if possible thirty would be better. I assure you that I can't find anyone in this city who could accompany me, and by that time the adaptations on the house will be finished. For today we used the covered passageway to go to the church, although the choir still remains to be constructed, and we are now using a chapel that has been lent for our use. But there is little left to do. I figure it will take eight or ten days for the trip. I don't know yet which way our Lord will want us to go. Ask the Lord to direct things for his greater service and insist as much as possible, together with Canon Salinas, on obtaining the license, for it is something very necessary. Don't think there is anyone here who will take up our cause as there is in that place.
I kiss his honor's hands, and I beg him to take this as addressed to him, for it isn't possible that I write any more.
3. With such a small piece of paper and so little time it wouldn't be possible to mention all that we owe to the procurator and the ways he finds to help us. Well, it's like Palencia. What can you do? May our Lord make you as holy as I beg of him, amen.
4. Give my best regards to Señor Suero de Vega and to Señora Doña Elvira; and to Señor Canon Santa Cruz.
From Soria, 8 July.
Your honor's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
