1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. Your letter consoled me greatly. May our Lord reward you. It didn't strike me as long. I would like to go on at length in this one, but so many letters have arrived together. Messengers so rarely come around here that I think it is better to be where you have ordinary mail delivery. Well, when God desires one to suffer, it doesn't do any good to flee.
2. In the letter I am writing to Catalina de Tolosa, I am telling the prioress, Inés de Jesús, to show it to you so that you learn the public reasons for the change in itinerary -- although I plan to tell you and Mother Prioress the other reasons as well -- for you say you would like to know the reasons for my change of plan, and you are right. If it were a matter of deep concern to the order, as was our becoming a separate province, one could surmount all difficulties, however numerous; but because I do not have time I will not expand. And if the journey lasted a day longer, but no more, it could be tolerated. But to go so many leagues on an adventure is something for which I see no reason whatsoever, for this order is not so fallen or in need of such a foundation.
3. Since I have been here, they have written me from two other cities where I am also refusing to go. One is Ciudad Rodrigo, and the other is Orduña.
4. To assume now what the archbishop will do is not wise in my judgment. For without wanting to be suspicious, we have seen clear reasons for being so. In what Canon Juan Alfonso writes me, the archbishop says that he always remembers the tumult that arose in Avila at the time of the first monastery. Despite the great good that came about as a result, he says that because of his experience he is obliged to prevent anything like this from happening again. What can be hoped for from this? Seeing that he fears what may never happen, it is clear that he will not give the permission when the devil stirs up some uproar; and I will appear frivolous for having gotten involved in it.
5. He also said to a member of the Society of Jesus that the consent of the city was wanting and that without it, or without an income, he would in no way give permission. Two persons have already told me that he has a very hesitant nature. If this is so we would be bringing him more trouble and, in the end, obtain nothing, as has been the case so far. But for something that is not an offense against God, after all that the Bishop of Palencia did in this regard, one should be ready to take every risk.
6. I have my reasons, mi padre, for what I say. If this is something to strive for, if we have to negotiate the matter with the city, it will be better to do so from afar and slowly. Since it is something that cannot be done in eight days or perhaps even a month, a miserable foundress would have to stay in the house of a secular, which would be the occasion for much talk. I consider it better to travel many leagues and then return here than to go through all the inconveniences that can arise. If God wants it, it will come about more gently, and he will succeed despite the devil, but it won't come by force.
7. Since it seems to me that I have done all that I could about this, I tell you truthfully that not even in its first stirrings did I feel any grief; rather I rejoiced -- I don't know why. Only when I read the letters of that blessed Catalina de Tolosa, who tried so hard, does it seem that I wanted to make her happy.
8. The designs of the Lord we do not understand, and it could be more fitting for me to go elsewhere now. So much resistance on the part of the archbishop contains some mystery, for I certainly think he desires the foundation. I haven't said anything about this to the bishop here, for he is so busy that he hasn't been able to see me these days. Nor do I think it necessary, for I feel so much repugnance toward telling him about these things. Rather I was surprised there were some who still thought it would be good to make the foundation, after what happened to the Bishop of Palencia. I am not going to speak of these things, but only of those about which I'm certain, such as the winter cold and the harm it would do to my health if we went at the beginning of winter. To the archbishop I am saying that I do not want to expose him to all this disturbance until the matter is negotiated with the city, and I thank him for the favor he shows me. May the Lord do what is most for his service.
9. The procurator didn't think it suitable for certain reasons to entrust our response with the same messenger, so we waited for this other one who is certainly going to Valladolid. Write to me truthfully what you think of these reasons that I have given. If they carry but little weight, I have many others. And it is my deep conviction that if I were to speak with you, you would agree.
10. I am very sorry about all the work you have to go through for those alms, but since it is all for the poor, I don't think you mind it. Apart from what you send, God will awaken other people to give, and little by little he will arrange everything. I didn't want you to neglect the collections in the villages, although some preacher from the order should have gone to preach. For that reason, it could be that not so much will be collected this year.
11. May our Lord repay you for the advice you gave about the rent for this house. Before Padre Nicolao left, he drew up the contracts, and he did so well that while one thought of an income at only fourteen per thousand, as would have been possible, twenty were obtained; the act is already recorded. Padre Nicolao also brought the document to be registered in the name of the monastery.
12. Thank that little saint, the procurator, for what he is doing, for he will be very pleased if I mention this to you. He is a soul who I don't think is well known; so much humility cannot be present without much richness. May you give me permission to finish more willingly than I would you.
13. One thing I beg is that in all openness you let me know what you think of the prioress and how she acts and if there is need to give her some advice and how you get along with her, for she never finishes telling me what she owes you.
May our Lord watch over you and be pleased to permit me to see you again. I am well.
Today is 13 July.
Your honor's unworthy servant and daughter, even though the title bothers you,
Teresa of Jesus
14. I kiss the hands of Señor Don Francisco and anyone else's you wish me to, and my regards to San Miguel, in your charity. It matters little if they delay in changing the door of the sacristy. That they close the church early, I praise our Lord. I would like to see the grate put up. I hope in him that in this house of our Lady, she and her son will now be served with greater purity. More grates will be needed, and they could be brought from Burgos if necessary. And perhaps, if the little chapel of our Lady is built, the smallest grate will be needed there. I will try to find the means to pay for them if they are not available there. Every day I become more attached to that house; I don't know why.
