To our Father Provincial of the discalced Carmelites, Valladolid.
1. Jesus. The Holy Spirit be with your reverence, mi padre. I received a letter of yours dated the feast of St. John and afterward the one that came with Padre Nicolao's. One very long one that you said you wrote me never arrived here. But even though these were short, the happiness they brought me in informing me of your good health was not small, for I was worried. May he, as he can, give you health.
2. I have written you some letters. I wouldn't want the one to get lost where I begged you not to give permission to Doña Elena to become a nun. Now they tell me this messenger for Valladolid, where according to what you say I think you will be, is a very safe one. Since you will be there so close to San Alejo, I thought of sending you these letters from Toledo so that you may see how upset the archbishop is over it, and I do not want us in any way to have him for an enemy. And apart from this, never is there talk about her entering that I do not feel great resistance. For where mother and daughter and other relatives are present, along with what is known about this woman, I fear there will be much disquiet and that she won't be very happy. And so even before I spoke to the archbishop, I had asked Padre Baltasar Alvarez to prevent it, and he promised to do so, for he agreed with me, and he knew her very well. See how it can seem that I persuaded her. I have written to the cardinal that I will inform you, and not to worry, for she will not be received, and that I would be very distressed if her entrance were not prevented.
3. You realize how secret the contents of this letter must be. In any case, tear it up so that no one thinks that it is because of him that we are not accepting her, but that it is because it would not be opportune either for her or for her children, as is true. We already have a lot of experience with these widows.
4. Before I forget, I am afraid that these constitutions are never going to get printed. For goodness' sake do not neglect to do this; see how important it is. By now we could have had a large volume of history published.
5. Now let's take up Burgos. I am enclosing the response, and I am surprised by those who think I can just get up and go there. In my answer to the bishop, I told him that because of my illnesses you ordered me not to go to Burgos at a time in which I would have to be there in winter -- you once wrote this to me. This I did so as not to put in doubt the archbishop's intentions and cause hostilities between him and the Bishop of Palencia, something to be avoided. After writing to the Bishop of Palencia, I wrote to the Archbishop of Burgos that because I thought I would be a bother to him if the city did not grant the license -- since I thought they would pay little attention to me -- I would let the project go until the city authorized it. The hour for this foundation must not have arrived. I think that Fray Baltasar's hour arrived first; so goes the world.
6. A foundation in Madrid is what would now be fitting, and I believe that when the archbishop sees that what he wants is being done, he will authorize it quickly. The bishop here, who is going there in September, tells me that he will give his support. I will be finished here, with God's help, in the middle of August. After the feast of Our Lady, if it appears all right to you, I will be able to go to Avila -- for it doesn't seem to me that those sisters spoke clearly with Padre Nicolao -- for here I have nothing to do. But if there is no big need, it would give me great consolation not to have to remain as prioress, for I am no longer fit for the task. It requires more energy than I have and makes me feel scrupulous.
7. If Padre Fray Gregorio Nacianceno remains there, as I wrote to you, the prioress will suffice since there is no one else there. And although I say "will suffice," I think I am lying because I don't think there is anyone who can handle the internal affairs of the house. You will see what is best there. The concern I have for that house enables me to give little importance to whatever labor I would have to undergo so as to overcome its difficulties, and the fact that I will be waiting there for the Lord to open the way to a foundation in Madrid will be of some help. But one's human nature will not fail to feel in that place the absence of my brother and friends, and what is worse the presence of the ones who have remained.
8. As for the trip to Rome, I now see that it is very necessary, although there is nothing to fear in going to give obedience to the general. And because of the risk of the journey and our need, I would like to see friars sent who would not be missed so much if anything were to happen. You would certainly miss Padre Nicolao a great deal, although he would be the one who could best smooth everything over. I think that if from time to time you give to the general signs of our obedience and respectfulness there will be no problem. This is very necessary so that he understand that you are his subjects and that you all realize that you have a superior. Things must not be as in the past, nor the expenses, for this would be a burden for all the houses.
9. I forgot to mention the joy the agreement about the chapel brought me, for it is very well done. Glory to God, some benefit came from delaying.
With that daughter of the Flemish woman, I fear that you will have work for a whole lifetime, as you do with her mother; and please God she won't be worse. Believe me I fear an unhappy nun more than many devils. God pardon the one who took her back. Do not give permission for her profession until I come there, if God desires. I am writing Padre Nicolao to let me know if they have equipment there for travel, for I don't see much here. May God dispose everything for his greater service.
10. Please God you have been able to do something in that matter concerning Beatriz. For some days I have been afflicted over it. I have written a number of letters to her and her mother telling them terrible things that should have been enough for them to make some amends. For although they were without fault, I set before them the dangers that before God and the world they could have gotten into. In my opinion, though, they are not exempt, and the parents are more to blame because they allow her to give them orders. It's a lost cause, and I believe that if they do not remove the occasion completely, things will go from bad to worse, if such is possible, for they are bad enough now. As for honor, it is already lost, and I am passing over the matter even though it troubles me to do so. I wouldn't want souls to be lost, but I see them, parents and children, so lacking in good sense that I don't find any remedy. May God provide one and give you the grace to bring things to an appropriate conclusion. I see no other remedy than to put her in a monastery, but I don't know how considering their financial situation. It would be a solution if she could remain as a student.
11. I beg you to write and let me know what you did and what you decide about my going to Avila. Given the scarcity of messengers and the brevity of your letters, you need to write in time.
May God preserve you with the holiness I beg of him, amen, amen.
Today is 14 July
12. The bishop is leaving here within ten days for the synod. The foundress asks me to give you her best regards; consider them received along with those from all the others, for I am tired -- although well.
Your reverence's unworthy servant and subject -- how gladly I say this,
Teresa of Jesus
If Padre Nicolao is not there, read the letter that is enclosed for him.
