1. Jesus be with your reverence, mi padre. I have also written you by way of Toledo. Today they brought me this letter from Valladolid with news that at first really astounded me. But then I reflected that God's ways are great and that after all he loves this order and will draw some good from what happened or prevent some evil of which we are not aware. For love of our Lord, don't be distressed.
2. I feel very sorry for the poor girl. She is the worse off, for it is nonsense to think that the one who went about with such joy is now unhappy. His Majesty must not want us to be receiving honor through the lords of the earth but through those who are little and poor, as were the apostles. So there is no need to pay any attention to the matter. And since they also got the other daughter to leave Santa Catalina de Sena along with her, nothing will be lost here; I mean as far as the worldly criticism goes, for with respect to God, as I say, perhaps it is better that we keep our eyes on him alone. May she go with God.
3. May he deliver me from these all-powerful lords with their strange reversals! Even though that poor little thing did not understand, I don't think it would be good for us if she were to return to the order. If there is something bad, it is the harm that things like this can do us when we are still in our beginning stages. That her unhappiness was as great as is that of the sister who is here does not surprise me. But I would consider it impossible for her to have hidden her unhappiness for so long a time if it were so.
4. This intrigue must have begun when the subprioress of Palencia began to disagree with the prioress in Valladolid. The confessor was a Jesuit father, a very good friend of María de Acuña's, and I learned that he counseled the sisters not to vote for anyone but the prioress, because the subprioress was at odds with Doña María de Acuña. And since Doña Casilda had not renounced her inheritance and Doña María wanted it for a school, everything would have perhaps worked together toward that end; although if they had seen that Casilda was happy, I don't think they would have done it. God deliver us from all this conniving.
5. Despite everything, I don't think it would be fitting for us to change in our attitude toward members of the Society. For many reasons this would not be good for us to do, and one of the reasons is that most of the nuns who come here do so through them, and if aspirants were to think they ought not consult with the Jesuit fathers, they wouldn't be coming to us anymore. But it will be a great thing to have our own fathers, because we can then detach ourselves little by little from the others. May God give you light, for since this messenger has to leave now, I'll say no more.
6. Your crucifix was left here and I don't know how to send it so that it won't break. Take another one from the nuns in Toledo, and we will send them this one from here. I feel sorry for what that poor prioress is going through and for our María de San José. You should write to her. I am certainly very sorry to see you go so far away now; I don't know what has happened to me. May God accompany you with blessings, and give my regards to Padre Nicolao. All the nuns here send their regards to you and him.
Today is 17 September.
Your reverence's subject and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
7. Doña María de Acuña wrote to the prioress begging her many times for pardon and stating that she wasn't able to do more and that the prioress should figure out what she owes the community for their having provided food for her daughter. She is thinking of keeping the inheritance, and for this reason they must allege a reason why the profession was made before time. Since they had a brief from the pope, I don't know how she can say this. I pity poor Casilda, because her love for the order was so great. I don't know what demon got into her. May God be with her.
