To the very illustrious Señor Don Sancho Dávila, in Alba.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor always. It was a great favor and gift for me to have a letter from you. Yet, since I had been hoping for a visit from you one of these days and I now see that I won't be able to have that joy, the happiness your letter brought me is somewhat diluted. I have praised our Lord and have considered what you hold to be a loss a great favor from him, for no benefit could come to a soul, or health, from such extreme suffering. So you can thank His Majesty, for in taking it away he did not take from her the possibility of serving our Lord, which is what is most important. You do not feel within you that great determination not to offend him, but when the occasion arises to serve him and to reject what could be for you an occasion to displease him you find you are strong -- that is the authentic sign of a true desire, in my opinion. And that you are happy to receive the most Blessed Sacrament each day and feel sorry when you do not is the sign of a close friendship, and not as common as you think. Always consider the favors you receive from his hand as given for the purpose of growing in his love, and stop going about looking for all the little subtleties of your miseries, for these show themselves to everyone en masse, very much so, especially with me.
2. In regard to being distracted during the recitation of the divine office, although I am perhaps much at fault, I like to think it is due to a weakness of the head. And you should think the same, for the Lord knows well that when we pray we would like to pray very well. Today I confessed this to Padre Maestro Fray Domingo, and he told me not to pay attention to it, and I beg of you the same, for I consider it an incurable evil.
3. Your trouble with your teeth makes me feel very sorry, for I have had much experience with how painful that can be. If one is infected, it usually seems that they all are -- I mean that all hurt. I have not found a better remedy than having it pulled, although that doesn't help if the pain is caused by neuralgia. May God take away the pain as I will beg of him.
4. You did very well to write the life of so holy a person. I would be a good witness to the truth of her holiness. I kiss your hands for what you do for me in allowing me to see it.
5. I am getting along better. Compared to last year, I can say that I am well, although not much time goes by that I am not suffering something; and since I see that as long as one lives, suffering is what is best, I bear it willingly.
6. I would like to know if the marquis is there, and to receive some news about Señora Doña Juana de Toledo, his daughter, and about how the marquess is. I beg you to tell them that even though I have gone far away, I do not forget to remember them to our Lord in my poor prayers. I don't do much for your honor since you are my father and lord.
7. I kiss your hands for assuring me that you will be so for me if I need to ask you for help; and I want to do so. Because I am so confident that you will help me, if you see that it is fitting, I want to tell you alone of a great sorrow that I have been bearing for almost a year. It could be that you might be able to provide some remedy. I truly believe that you will know -- for they tell me that, for my sins, it is something public -- about the great jealousy of Don Gonzalo's wife. They have told her, and she takes it to be true, that her husband is involved in a wicked friendship with Doña Beatriz, my sister's daughter. And she says and asserts this so publicly that the majority of the people believe her. And so, with respect to the young girl's honor, it must now be so lost that there is no point for me to even consider it, but I am concerned about the many offenses committed against God. I am extremely sorry that a relative of mine should be the occasion for this, and so I have arranged with her parents to have her move away from there, for some learned men have told me the parents have an obligation to do this. And even if they didn't, it seems to me it would be wise to flee as from a wild animal the tongue of a woman inflamed with jealousy. Others tell the family that doing so would make a lie appear to be true, and that they shouldn't move. They tell me that the husband and wife are separated. I see that there is already talk about it by the wife's sister here in Avila, and many calumnies are being spread by those doing the talking. And the talk has extended even to Salamanca. The evil is spreading and neither from one side nor from the other is any remedy being applied. Her parents pay no attention to the things I tell them -- which are not a few -- but say I am being deceived.
8. I beg you to write me and let me know what I should do so that these offenses against God may stop, for as I say, it would be hard now to salvage her honor in the people's opinion. I had thought of a means, but I would find it hard to put into effect. If you have any dealings with that Don Gonzalo, perhaps you could convince him to leave that place for maybe a year or a half year until his wife returns to normal, since he has a good residence elsewhere and sees the harm that is being done to this girl because of him. And in the meanwhile perhaps the Lord will so arrange that by the time he returns the girl will no longer be there. For without this, the way things are going -- and what there is now is already bad -- I fear some great evil will arise.
9. I beg you, if you see any way in which you can help me, to take this trial from me. May our Lord do so as he can, and may he give you the holiness that I beg of him for you, amen.
Today is 9 October.
Your honor's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
10. I beg you to give greetings for me to Don Fadrique and to my lady Doña María, for my head is in no condition to write to them, and pardon me out of love for God.
