For Mother Prioress at St. Joseph's, discalced Carmelite nuns, Seville.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. Your letter consoled me greatly, which is nothing new, for inasmuch as other letters weary me yours bring me relief. I tell you that if you indeed love me, I am grateful that you tell me and enjoy your doing so. How true it is that our human nature wants to be repaid. This could not be wrong, since our Lord also wants this, although there is no comparison between what we give His Majesty and all the love he deserves; but let us become like him however we can.
2. I wrote you a really long letter from Soria. I don't know whether Padre Nicolao sent it to you. I ever have the fear that you didn't receive it. Many prayers were offered here for all of you. I am not surprised that you are well and at rest, but that you are not already saints. For since you had so many needs, the nuns have always offered many prayers for you here. Repay us for them now that you are without trials, since we have many trials, especially in this house of St. Joseph's in Avila, where they have made me prioress now out of sheer hunger. Think of it, at my age and with all I have to do, how this can be borne!
3. You should know that a gentleman here left these nuns I don't know how much that doesn't pay for a quarter of what they need and which they won't be able to use for another year. And now almost all the alms that were being given them have ceased coming in, and they are so weighed down with debt that I don't know how it will all end. Pray for this and for me, for one's human nature grows tired, especially of this being prioress with so much chaos all together. If God is served by this, nothing done is enough.
4. It weighs on me that you resemble me in anything, for everything with me is going from bad to worse, especially in bodily ills. When they spoke to me about the condition of your heart, I didn't become very distressed, for even if the pain is hard to bear when intense it will soak up other pains, and in the end the condition is not dangerous. Since they told me they were afraid of dropsy, I considered the heart problem a good thing. You should know that they don't like to apply many remedies together, but calming the bodily humors is indispensable.
5. Enclosed is a prescription for pills that are approved by many doctors, and a doctor who is highly regarded prescribed them for me. I think they will be very beneficial for you, even though you take one only every fifteen days. They have helped me very much, and so I am far better; although never completely well, because I still experience the vomitings and my other ailments. But the pills have done me great good and don't cause any other disturbance. Don't fail to try them.
6. I had already known about the improvement of my Gabriela, and I had also known about her serious illness, for our padre was here when he received your note. I was very sorry about it and so was Teresa, for she loves you all very much. She sends her regards to you and to all the sisters. If you saw her you would give praise to God for her understanding of the way of perfection and virtue. In your charity ask God to guide her onward, for the way the world is going one cannot trust in anything. We pray very hard for her. May God be praised for everything, for he left her here. Pray much for her, for me, and for all the nuns. Tell Sister San Francisco that I was delighted with her letter and inform her that Acacio García died, and that she should pray for him.
7. I was extremely delighted to know that my good Padre García has returned. God reward you for such good news, for even though they had told me, I couldn't bring myself to believe it however much I desired it to be true. Be very gracious to him for me; be aware that he becomes a founder of this order when you consider all the help he gave me. So with him you shouldn't be using the veil that hides your faces. For all the others you should, in particular and in general, and, with the discalced friars first of all, for this is what is done in all the houses.
8. They haven't brought anything from the Indies, for when they wanted to send it, they learned that my brother had died -- may he be in glory -- and it is necessary for them to have a letter from Don Francisco in order that the money be sent. Lorencio is married and very well situated. They say that he has more than six thousand ducats in income. It is no surprise that he didn't write to you since he only just heard about his father's death. Oh, if he knew about the trials of his brother and what I have to go through with all these relatives! And so I run away from having any dealings with them. Since I told this to Padre Nicolao, he wanted me to agree, while I was in Palencia, to send the amount and that later the sum would be given to me here. I told him that in no way would I do that. So, I wrote you not to send me the money through Madrid; I had feared what did happen, and it didn't seem right to me, for I am a friend of openness.
9. Now he has written me again saying that he will send one hundred ducats and that I should collect the other hundred from someone who will not be able to pay it very soon. I wrote to him showing that I was very annoyed with you and saying that you both should have come to an agreement -- that had actually passed through my mind. Despite my advice, you did what you did. What you deserve is to have to pay the amount twice, which is what you will have to do if the money isn't sent to me. But Horacio is wrong, for if you gave him the money to send to me, it is not sufficient for his brother to allow him to keep it as a reimbursement without your authorization.
10. Padre Nicolao says that from an alms of 1500 ducats Horacio is obliged to give your house 1,000. From that amount you can take something for what you still must pay. I have written to him to share a little of it with this house, for it is certainly in extreme need. If the occasion arises beseech him a little on our behalf -- for his brother is also doing so -- and arrange with him to withdraw 200 ducats. I am tired of speaking about it to Padre Nicolao, and I'll say no more about it to him. The chapel is going to be started; and if while I am here nothing is done, at least it will have been started. I don't know how or when this will be, for I hope, please God, to go from here to Madrid for a foundation there.
11. You should know that the will speaks of 430 ducats, it seems to me. I also vaguely remember your saying this, that he had given you thirty ducats. Since he had already made out the will when he went down there, and there is no further declaration, I don't know whether or not the thirty ducats has to be subtracted. Would you find out about this. So as not to tire myself, I am not going to read the will again to see if these thirty ducats are supposed to be in addition to the other amount. You will know down there. Believe me that if they were mine or in my power, I would much prefer not to have to bother with the matter. If you saw the state of ruin into which his property is falling! It's a pity, for this lad was above all made for God. And although I want to withdraw from it all, they tell me that I am obliged in conscience. So, losing so good a brother was nothing in comparison to the trials those who remained have caused me. I don't know how it will end up.
12. As for Padre Nicolao, he thought that the money should be given at once so as to pay his brother right away, but what has displeased me is his stubbornness in my regard and that you both in the end acted against my wishes. Certainly, even were I to desire it, I don't know which house could afford to give me that money, even though some might owe it to me. If the expenses of the province are shared and some houses are paying their quota, other houses are not able to pay; and some others have already given much. It would be better for his brother to wait than for us to fail to build the chapel, a task my brother left to me. And if I die, that would be the end of the matter, considering the need in which his son finds himself. It could be that the money would be spent for something else; in fact, from what I see, that would be certain.
13. Don't fail to write to me about how your spiritual life is going, for that will bring me joy; in view of what you have gone through, it couldn't be going any other way than well. And send me the poems too. I delight in having something to make my sisters happy, for they need this. Let me know if Mother Subprioress has recovered completely. Since God has left her with us, may he be forever blessed.
14. Compline and recreation are observed as usual. I have asked learned men and have mentioned the drawbacks and also that the rule says that silence should be kept until the prayer beginning with the word pretiosa of Prime and no longer, and that here we keep it all day long. This did not seem bad to our padre.
15. The entrance from the sacristy into the church should be bricked up. One should never go out that way -- not even to close the street-door -- for according to the motu proprio one thereby incurs excommunication. Where it is possible, the woman helping us remains inside and closes the door from there. Here where we do not have a woman helping us, we made a lock by which the door can be opened from both the outside and the inside. And a helper from the outside closes it and opens it in the morning. We keep the other key so that if something happens we can get out. The trouble is that the church cannot be kept very clean, but this can't be helped.
16. There should be a turn for the chapel and a good sacristan. Because of the excommunication imposed by the pope concerning both this and the entrance, nothing else can be done. And it was sufficient that it was prescribed by the constitutions, for the danger of not having such a rule about this has already been discovered. To habitually transgress one of these prescriptions is a mortal sin.
17. I wrote this letter over fifteen days ago, I believe. Now I received another from you and from my Father Rodrigo Alvarez, toward whom I am greatly obligated because of the good he has brought about in that house. I would like to answer his letter, but I don't know how because some of the things about which he asks me cannot be put in a letter. But if I were to see him -- who is one who knows my soul -- I wouldn't hold back about anything; on the contrary, I would be very happy because I don't have anyone here with whom I can discuss this matter, which would be a consolation for me. If God brings Padre Fray García here, I will have great consolation. Oh, how annoyed it made me that you didn't mention anything about him in your letter. He must have come to Madrid, for that is what I was told, and for that reason I am not writing to him although I have a great desire to do so and to see him. You would be amazed if you knew all that I owe him.
18. To return to what I was saying, since our padre told me that he had left a book there in my handwriting (which you certainly wouldn't be disposed to go through), would you read it to Padre Alvarez when he goes there -- the part about the last dwelling place. Do so under the seal of confession, which is what he in his great prudence asks for. Only the two of you should hear it. Tell him that the person referred to reached that point and experiences that peace that is described there and continues living a life of great calm and that very learned men say that this is all right. If the reading cannot be done there, by no means should you give it to him, because of what could happen. I will not answer until he sends me his opinion about what is written in that book. Give him my regards.
19. With regard to the move to San Bernardo, I am amazed that someone who loves you so much could so deceive himself, for all the sisters in this house were thrilled, and I to such a point that I couldn't wait for the time to move. I must not have reflected well or known anything about the Moors. The move would have given me a feeling of new life, so much do I care for all of you.
20. You should know, my daughter, that it wouldn't bother me for you to move, if you found another house that wouldn't leave you with too much debt. But I see so much lacking in the houses here that I consider this impossible, and perhaps one that seems a better one to you will end up having more defects. To tell the truth, the one you are in pleased me very much. There's no reason to speak about it any more, nor will Padre Nicolao speak of it, for I have written to him about the matter. Realize that he thought he had come upon something very worthwhile, and since I saw how much you wanted to move from where you are and how well you spoke of the place, I was praising God. May God give us the light to do the right thing in every endeavor. Padre Nicolao's health is not good. Pray that God will watch over him, for he would be a great loss, and especially to your house.
May God be with your reverence, my daughter, and with all the nuns, and may he make them holy.
Today is 8 November.
21. They have already given me news about the house, which surprised me. You should know that by sharing the resin so much, I now have very little left, and it is what benefits me the most, and others too. When you find someone who will deliver it for you, send me some more, in your charity, and have all the nuns pray that God will provide me with the means to feed these nuns, for I don't know what to do. They all send you their regards.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
