To my lord, Doctor Castro.
1. Jesus be with your honor. The favor that your honor showed me by your letter so moved me that I first gave thanks to our Lord with a Te Deum laudamus, for it seemed I was receiving it from the very hands of the one from whom I have received so many other favors. Now I kiss your hands an infinite number of times, and I would like to do so through deeds rather than with words. How great the mercy of God, that through my wickedness you should benefit; and with reason, for I am not in hell, which for a long time I have deserved. So, this book is entitled On the Mercies of God.
2. May he be always praised, for I had never hoped for less than what he has now accorded me. Nonetheless, every severe word was disturbing to me. I would rather not say more on paper, and so I beg you to come to see me tomorrow, the eve of the Presentation, that I might present to you a soul often undone, so that you might bring about all that you understand as fitting for her in order that she please God. I hope in His Majesty for the grace to obey you all my life, for I don't think your absence will let me feel free, nor do I want to, for I have seen changes come about by reason of this desire. It would be impossible for a great good not to come to me through this obedience -- provided you do not abandon me, and I don't think you will. As a pledge of this obedience, I am thinking of keeping this note, although I have another more important one.
3. What I beg of you is that for love of our Lord you always keep what I am in mind so as not to pay attention to the favors granted me by God unless for the sake of considering me even worse than you thought, since I make such poor use of them; clearly the more I receive from him the more indebted to him I am. Repay this Lord of mine, since His Majesty desires to punish me only with favors -- which is no small punishment for anyone with self-knowledge.
4. When you finish these papers, I will give you others. On seeing them it will be impossible for you to keep from abhorring someone who should be other than what I am. I think you will like them. May our Lord give you his joy as I beg of him for you.
5. You have not lost any of my esteem by the style of your letters. I ought to be praising you for its elegance. Everything is useful to God when the desire to serve him is at the root. May he be blessed for everything, amen. Not for a long time have I had as much happiness as I have had this night. I kiss your hands many times for the title you give me, which is a very lofty one for me.
