1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your excellency. So great was the favor you did me in sending the book that I wouldn't know how to exaggerate it. I kiss your hands many times, and will keep my word as you request. But not knowing whether the book will be safe during your long journey away from home, I would like to keep it, if you wouldn't mind, until you return to Alba. If you want it returned, let the prioress know that you don't want to grant what I have requested (I should say begged for), and she can inform me. If she doesn't say anything, I will take this to mean that you are granting me this favor.
2. May it please our Lord to keep you in the good health that I and all of your subjects beg of him. I have much to offer His Majesty, for he knows what I feel in seeing you go away without my having the chance to kiss your hands. May he be forever blessed who wishes me to have so little happiness on earth. His will be done in everything, for I well see that I don't deserve more.
3. In a way, if I had been there I would have been able to bear better what I suffered in hearing of your trials, for I would have been able to kiss your hands ...
4. God give you the health that I beg of him for you each day, and may he keep you for me many years -- at least for more than he does me. News about your cold kept me from enjoying completely the favor you granted me by your letter. I beg you never to do so again on my account, for it would have been enough for me to have your secretary write a few words. So I beg you to let me know from time to time how you and Don Fadrique are faring.
5. May the Lord be pleased to grant good health to his lordship and her ladyship the duchess, for although they may have forgotten me, I don't fail to do what I am obliged to do in my poor prayers, and also for the one I know you love dearly.
6. Father Provincial has been sending me hopeful news about the success of the negotiations there, which has been most consoling for me; and also about the favor you showed him in requesting him to accompany you. I don't think it's wrong that I am envious of him. He desires very much to comply with your wishes from what he writes to me. I would like to beg you for now that out of love of our Lord you not so order him, for he is at present busy having the constitutions printed, and this is something for which we have the greatest need, and the monasteries are waiting for them.
May the Lord be with your excellency.
Your excellency's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
