To the most illustrious Señora Doña María de Mendoza. My lady.
1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your ladyship, amen. I have often thought of you during this weather we're having and have feared lest its harshness do damage to your health. And I believe it did. May God be blessed, for we will one day see eternity without changes in the weather. May it please His Majesty that we live this life in a way that will enable us to enjoy so great a blessing. My region has proved such a trial for me that it doesn't seem I was born here. From the beginning of my stay, I don't believe I've had as much as a month and a half of good health. The Lord saw that without my health I wouldn't be able to get anything straightened out, so His Majesty does it all. I do nothing but pamper myself -- especially three weeks ago when on top of the quartan fevers I suffered from a pain in my side and from quinsy. Just one of these afflictions would have been enough to kill me if God had so willed, but it doesn't seem there is anything capable of rendering me this blessing. After having been bled three times, I am feeling better. The quartan fevers have gone away, but there's a fever I have that never goes away, and so I am going to be purged tomorrow. I'm vexed at seeing myself in so miserable a condition, for I do not leave my little corner, nor can I, unless for Mass. What causes me the most suffering is a painful jaw, which I have had for about a month and a half.
2. I am giving you an account of all these illnesses so that you will not fault me for having failed to write you, and you will see that these are the favors the Lord gives me in answer to what I am always asking him for. Indeed, from the time I arrived it seemed to me impossible to endure so much tribulation with such poor health and so weak a constitution; for even without the responsibility of this house there are always many business matters that arise with respect to our monasteries and many other things to exhaust me. Thus you see that all things can be done in God who gives us the power, as St. Paul says. He gives me many illnesses all together, and nonetheless I so carry out all my duties that I sometimes have to laugh to myself; and he leaves me without a confessor and so alone that there is no one with whom I might talk things over for the sake of some relief, and I have to be on my guard about everything. But in matters concerning my bodily comfort there has been no lack of compassion or someone to care for me. The people here have given me much in alms; thus it is only the bread I eat that comes from the house, and even this I'd rather not take. We are about to deplete the alms given us by Doña Magdalena, for until now they provided a meal (with the help of alms from you and others) for the poorest nuns.
3. Since I now see the nuns to be so tranquil and good, it would grieve me to have to see them suffer, for they are indeed just like what I said. Our Lord is to be praised for the change he has wrought in them. The ones who were most forbidding are now the ones who are more satisfied and accepting of me. During this Lent there are no women visitors, nor men, even though they be parents, which is something very new for this house. Nonetheless, they accept it all with much peace. Truly, there are great servants of God living here, and almost all the nuns are improving. My "prioress" is working these marvels. That you might understand that this is so, our Lord has ordained that I be in such a condition that it doesn't seem I've come here for any other reason than to abhor penance and think only about my own comfort.
4. Now, that I might suffer in every way, Mother Prioress of your monastery writes me that you want her to admit an aspirant and that you are displeased because they told you I did not want to accept her. She wants me to send her the authorization to accept this one and another that Padre Ripalda is presenting. I think there has been a mistake. I would be distrssed if it were true that you were displeased with me, for you may give me orders and scold me. I cannot believe that you would be displeased with me and not tell me, unless you pretended to be so in order to avoid some trouble. I would be very much consoled if this were true, for I know how to get along with those Fathers of the Society. They wouldn't accept anyone unsuited for their order just to do me a favor. If you should want to give decisive orders, there would be no need for further discussion, for clearly you can give orders for this house, and the others too, and you must be obeyed by me. I would then request permission from Father Visitator or from Father General because it is against our constitutions to accept anyone with such a defect, and I would not be able to grant a permission contrary to the constitutions without the consent of one of them. These two aspirants would have to learn how to read Latin well, for we are ordered not to accept anyone who does not know it.
5. To satisfy my conscience I cannot neglect to mention to you what, after recommending the matter to the Lord, I would do in this case. I am setting aside, as I say, your desires, for I must be ready to submit to them in everything so as not to oppose them, and I'll say no more about this. I only beg you to consider the matter carefully and desire what is best for your house, for when you see that she does not fit in there, you will regret it. In a house where there are many nuns, one can overlook whatever defect there may be; but where there are so few, it makes sense to be selective. I've always noticed that you have this same outlook. Furthermore, I have found everywhere so many aspiring to be nuns, and I have not dared to send any of them to your monastery, for I wanted one who would be as excellent a nun as I would want there, and I did not find her. So, in my opinion, neither of these two should be accepted, for I do not see in them either holiness or fortitude or much discretion or many talents -- gifts that would be beneficial to the house. Well, if the house would be the loser, why do you want to accept them? To help them, there are many monasteries where, since the numbers are large, as I say, the defects could be more easily tolerated. There in your monastery, anyone who is accepted should be capable of being prioress or holding any other office that is given to her.
6. For love of our Lord may you consider the matter well and see that it is always better to look after the common good than some particular good, and since the nuns have to be enclosed and live their lives together, and bear with one another's faults, along with the other austerities in the order, the worst trial for them would be someone imposed on them whose vocation is not certain. You should favor them in this matter just as you favor us in all other matters. If you give the orders, you can entrust this matter to me, for, as I say, I know how to deal with the Fathers of the Society. If you should still persist in your wishes, what you enjoin will be respected, as I have said, and if the matter does not turn out well, the responsibility will lie with you. I don't think the one mentioned by Father Ripalda would do badly were we dealing with some other order, but the nuns are just starting out there and so must be careful not to bring discredit on the house. May our Lord ordain what is for his greater glory and enlighten you so that you do what is most fitting; and may he preserve you many years for us, as I beseech him, for I do not neglect praying for you, however ill I might be.
7. I kiss the hands of her excellency, my lady the duchess, many times, and of my lady Beatriz,[ and of my ladies, the countess and Doña Leonor. Write to me -- I mean may you give me orders -- and what pleases you will be done, for I believe that by leaving everything to your conscience my own conscience will feel assured, but not without effort. In none of our houses will any nun be found with so noticeable a defect, nor would I accept her for anything. I think it would be a continuous mortification for the other nuns, for since they are always together and love one another so much, this would cause them incessant grief. They already have the good Magdalene there; and that is enough, please God.
Today is 7 March.
Your ladyship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
Mother Subprioress kisses your ladyship's hands many times. I get along well with her.
