To the illustrious Lord Juan de Ovalle, my lord, for your hands or those of my sister. Alba.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your honor, amen. Recently I wrote you, and I have a great desire to know what is being done about everything. Today I received a letter in which they tell me the city of Burgos has granted the license for me to make a foundation there, for I already have permission from the bishop. I think I will go there to make a foundation before Madrid. I regret going there without seeing my sister first because it could be that I will be going from there to Madrid.
2. I was thinking that if Doña Beatriz has the desire to be a nun, it would be a good idea if I brought her with me, first giving her the habit here. She will enjoy getting to know the monasteries, and afterward I can bring her to Madrid. She will be a foundress before making profession and hardly realizing it will be outside herself with joy and be able to return to Alba. Our Lord knows how much I desire for her to be at peace and for you and my sister to be greatly consoled at seeing her with the habit. Think this over well and pray about it, for I am doing so urgently. May it please His Majesty to guide the matter to what brings him most glory, amen. And may he watch over you.
3. Let my sister consider this to be for her, too. Best regards to my niece and nephew and also to Teresa and the two of you. The messenger is a private one, for he is going to Salamanca to our Father Provincial to get the license for a certain resignation. I am having him pass through there on his way and on his return. Answer me and give the letter to Mother Prioress, but don't say anything to anyone for now about this Burgos matter.
Today is 29 November.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
4. Turn the page. If you do that it won't be necessary for you to leave there. The fact that I am going so far away is sufficient reason for my sister to come to see me; afterward I can say that I want to bring my niece with me and no one here will have anything to object to.
5. If this seems alright with you, I will let you know once we set the time for my departure. Even if they come beforehand, nothing will be lost. I never received any news about Señora Doña Mayor's health, which I would like; nor have I found anyone with whom to send these toques. Since they weigh so much, no one wants to take them. Give her my regards and let me know how she is. I am doing fairly well.
