1. Jesus be with your reverence. Today the nuns left, which was painful for me and leaves me feeling very lonely. The nuns don't feel this way, especially María de Cristo who is the one who wanted to go most. The plan had already been made public, but the other nun was not suited for this, as you will agree. Nonetheless, I felt very scrupulous since you were the one who told me to send her. Doctor Castro freed me of my scruples.
2. Fray John of the Cross was longing to send you some money and did a good deal of calculating to see if he could give something from what he brought with him for the journey, but he wasn't able to. I think he will get something to send to you.
3. Antonio Ruiz came here three or four days ago and was determined to go with me. He greatly desired to see you, and he is writing to you. He gave me two coins to send you that should be worth about four escudos. Of course, I will not send them to you until I have a safe messenger. I am doing all I can not to keep them for myself. The way things are going, it won't be long before I'm tempted to steal them.
4. Inés de Jesús sent me this enclosed letter with others of hers, but the departure will be too soon if it takes place after Christmas. I have already written her that you have to go down there and that they will have to wait. This blessed prioress has to act in such a way because she sees these ladies so filled with ardor. So don't promise to preach there after Advent, for you will have many occasions to do so here. Doctor Castro wants you to come and spend Christmas at his house, and I too; but few of my desires are fulfilled.
5. Now I believe we cannot fail to bring Teresica, for it seemed a good thing to the learned man I consulted, and she is taking my departure so hard -- especially after that of the other sisters -- that I think it will be necessary. She is going about a little sad and if some temptation were to assail her while in this state, I don't know what she would do. So it seemed to me well to give her some hope, even though I feel reluctant to do so. Glory to God who wants everything to rain down on me.
6. I am trying hard to see who to leave here in my place, and how well known the desire of Ana de San Pedro was to go. I cannot bear to think of leaving her in charge. It's a terrible thing, because otherwise I think she would do well. Mariana would do well, for she has many talents for the task, if Julián were not in the middle, although he is remaining quite apart for now and not interfering in anything. May God give you light; and when you are here, we will speak about everything.
7. The veil was given yesterday. Mother and daughter are as though mad with joy. It has all tired me very much and I didn't get to bed until two. Those I have designated were the three from here, three from Beas with Anne of Jesus, who goes as prioress, another two from Seville, and two lay sisters from Villanueva who are very good. But the prioress wrote me that it was fitting to send them because they have five lay sisters and it is right to want to help that house in Granada about which so many good things are said. This will not satisfy Anne of Jesus, who likes to direct everything. If it seems all right to you, hold to your decision, for no other better nuns will be found. If not, do as you think best, and remain with God, for I didn't get to bed until two o'clock and then rose early; my head is in bad shape. The rest is going reasonably well.
8. The drawback that now comes to mind is what to do about Teresa if Beatriz needs to be taken with us, for in no way could the two of them come. That would prove a burden, although Teresa would bring me some relief, for she prays well. So, I won't say anything. But Beatriz must be careful not to be a burden. And in my opinion, it would not be fitting for you to come with Tomasina.
Your reverence's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
