1. Jesus be with your reverence, my father. I greatly rejoiced both to receive your letter, which they gave me tonight along with the rest of the scapulars, and to observe how determined you are that I see you soon. Please God you will have a good trip, mi padre. If something still needs to be done on the constitutions, leave instructions. And for goodness' sake, if you have to preach the last day of Christmas, don't leave until the following day so that you won't get sick, for I don't know where you get the energy. Blessed be he who gives it to you. I am amused at how rich you have become. May God make you so with eternal riches.
2. Now I don't understand some forms of sanctity. I'm referring to the one who doesn't write to you. And the other one, who says he does everything following his own opinion, has tested my patience. O Jesus, how rarely does one find perfection in this life! Such great foolishness! Because this messenger is going to be leaving, I will not enlarge on the matter, and I am in the process of finishing a letter to the Marchioness of Villena whose personal messenger is waiting.
3. I believe it would be good if you sent me a personal messenger, provided my sister is not in Alba. If you think, have someone go fetch her. But if that young girl has to return the way she came, I have no desire that she come here, nor do I know why she should, except to tire me out. As for her staying at the Incarnation, that's a joke, for I don't think that it would suit her, and the expense is terrible. God be with them who give me such a life.
4. Teresa is well, and I think we can be sure about her, for she has made her intentions clearly known, as you will learn. I am reasonably well.
5. The duchess has written to me again through a chaplain. I answered her briefly and said that I had written her at length through you. I am saying this so that you will send her the letter. If you haven't done so because I mention that you cannot accompany her, it doesn't matter.
6. Have this enclosed letter sent to my sister, if you think it opportune. Perhaps on her return God will help Beatriz to be better disposed, if she has not decided to leave. If she were always to stay in the country, I wouldn't mind. But once summer comes, they will return to Alba -- and it will begin again.
7. The day after tomorrow a departure for Madrid is scheduled. I will be sending your messages. The scapulars are really edifying, they inspire devotion. Don Francisco sent to ask his sister for one. It distresses me. I remind you again that if it is necessary for you to send me any messages when those people come here that you do so. Remain with God, for it is late at night.
8. You should know that we have arranged a little place for you to stay; but I don't think Doctor Castro will agree to it. I get along very well with him. I gave him the part of that book that I had here. He never stops talking about the benefit he derived from the other book. As for me, it is enough that he is your friend for me to like everything about him. I think that for a confessor to understand me and not go about with fears, there is nothing better than for him to read one of these writings; it spares me a lot of grief.
May God keep you and give you the rest that I ask him to, amen, amen.
Your reverence's servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
9. I am not writing to your reverence because the thought of your coming makes me so happy that it doesn't allow me to do anything else than thank you very much and kiss your hands for the great care you show for my health and comfort. I am well, in the hope of seeing you soon and the happiness the diurnal brings me. May it please God to repay you in the manner I beg of him.
10. I find Teresa's message a delight. Now I believe there is no greater remedy than love. May God grant it to us with His Majesty.
