1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor, my son. I received your letter. In addition to the great joy it brought me with the news of the good fortune our Lord has bestowed on you, it stirred up again the pain I feel over the sorrow you recently had, and so rightly. Because at the time of the death of my brother (may he be in glory) I wrote you at great length, I do not want to stir up your pain again. I have had much grief at seeing how differently things have turned out from the way I would have wanted them to; although as I have written you, I am greatly relieved to see Don Francisco as well settled as you are. Setting aside the fact that his wife is tied on all sides to the most illustrious families in Spain, she has so many good personal qualities that they would be enough. Write to her with all the courtesy you can and do something for her that will please her, for she deserves it. I tell you that even though Don Francisco has a good-sized fortune, he married well. But with the restrictions set down by his father (may he be in glory), the provisions made for Teresa, and the payment of debts, so little remained that if God doesn't provide, I don't know how he will live.
2. May he be praised forever who has so favored you, for he has given you a wife with whom you can live in great peace. This is most fortunate, for it brings me great joy to think that you have a wife like this. I kiss the hands of Doña María many times. In me she has someone who will pray for her, and many other nuns along with me. We would very much like to enjoy her presence here, but if this would require her to undergo the trials that are here, I would rather see her at rest there than suffering here.
3. I find my consolation in Sister Teresa de Jesús. She is now a woman and always growing in virtue. You can truly accept her counsels, for I had to smile when I read the letter she wrote you. God truly speaks in her, and she does well what she says. He is guiding her, for she is edifying to us all. She is very perceptive, and I think she will be able to deal with everything. Don't neglect to write her, for she is indeed alone. Knowing how much her father loved her and the kindnesses he showed her, I feel pity to see that nobody remembers to pay any attention to her. Don Francisco loves her very much, but he can't do anything more.
4. Diego Juárez went on at greater length than you and my brother in telling us about the qualities of Señora Doña María and the other good things that have gone favorably for you, for you write very short letters for someone who is so far away. It is a great favor from God's mercy that you have met with such good fortune and married so soon, for considering how you started out so early in life to go astray you could have been for us a cause of great worry. Herein I see how much I love you, for even though what you did was very distressing to me because of its being an offense against God, when I see how much this little girl resembles you, I can't help but welcome and love her. As little as she is, it's wonderful to see how much she resembles Teresa in the practice of patience.
5. May God make her his servant, for she is not at fault, and so don't be negligent in taking care to see that she is brought up well. That will not be the case if when she grows older she remains where she is. It will be better if she is brought up by her aunt until you can see what God may be wanting to do with her. You could send a sum of money here from time to time -- since our Lord has given it to you -- to be deposited, and the interest could be used for her support. When she is twelve years old, the Lord will ordain what may be done for her, but it is very important that she be taught the way of virtue, for that is the revenue for what she will become. Certainly she deserves it, for she is pleasing to everyone and, being so little, she wouldn't want to leave here.
6. It wouldn't have been necessary for you to send anything if it were not for the fact that this house is now in great need. Francisco de Salcedo has died -- may he enjoy glory -- and has left a legacy, but it is not sufficient to pay for the food, not even enough for supper. After that, almost all the alms stopped coming in. Although things should get better with the passing of time, up until now nothing has been brought to us, and so there is much suffering. A dowry for Teresa will be a great help, if God allows her to make profession. She has a strong desire to do so.
7. At times my health is better than usual. After your departure God founded a monastery in Palencia, one in Soria, and another in Granada, and after Christmas I am going to make a foundation in Burgos. I am thinking of returning here quickly, if God be so served.
8. Now I am awaiting my sister and her daughter. Her need is so great that you would feel much pity for her. I already feel great pity for Doña Beatriz, for although she wants to be a nun, she doesn't have the means. It would be a great act of charity if, when you can, you would send them something, for however little it might amount to, it will be a lot. I am the one who doesn't need money, but I ask God to let me do his will in everything and make you all great saints, for everything else comes to a quick end.
9. All the nuns in this house send you their best regards, especially Madre San Jerónimo, and we continue to pray for you. Look, my son, that since you have the name of so good a father you have the works as well.
10. When this arrives, according to what he writes to me, my brother Agustín de Ahumada, will be on his way. May it please God to grant him a good voyage. If he has not departed, would you send him this letter, for I don't have the head today for much writing. I tell you that if he doesn't have enough for his food, he will suffer a great trial, for he won't find anyone to provide his food; and I will suffer a great trial, too, because I won't be able to help him. The viceroy has already arrived, and Padre García is well, although I have not seen him. It is a hard thing to undertake so dangerous a journey at such an advanced age for the sake of a fortune, when we shouldn't be attending to anything else than preparing for heaven. May God grant it to us and may he make you as holy as I beg of him, amen, amen.
11. I kiss repeatedly the hands of all those lords and ladies, and I say no more but refer to the letter by Teresa de Jesús. If you do what she advises, I will be satisfied.
From this house of St. Joseph's in Avila, 15 December, in the year 1581.
Your honor's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
