1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your honor. I arrived here in Medina del Campo a day before the eve of the Epiphany, and I did not want to go further without telling you of where I am going -- in case you want to give me some orders -- and ask you to kiss the hands of his illustrious lordship for me and tell him I have found that our Sister Elena de Jesús is well and that the others are too. So great is her happiness that it made me give praise to our Lord. She has even grown heavier. All are so extremely pleased with her that it seems her vocation is truly from our Lord. May he be always praised. They kiss the hands of his illustrious lordship many times, and I and the other nuns take special care to ask our Lord to preserve him for many years.
2. It's a great consolation for me to learn the good news about his lordship. May it please His Divine Majesty to always give him an increase of holiness. Sister Elena de Jesús is so much at ease and fulfills her duties as a religious so well that she seems to have been one for many years. May God guide her and his lordship's other relatives, for certainly souls like these are to be esteemed.
3. In no way had I planned on leaving Avila until making the foundation in Madrid. Our Lord has been pleased that some persons in Burgos have had so great a desire that one of these monasteries be founded there that they have obtained permission from both the archbishop and the city. So I am going there with some sisters to bring this about. The project requires obedience from me, and our Lord wants it to cost me more; because when I was as close to Burgos as Palencia, he wasn't pleased that a foundation then be made, but afterward when I was in Avila. For it is no small trial now to make such a long trip.
4. I beg you to ask His Majesty that this foundation will be for his glory and honor, for if this is so, the more suffering there is the better. And don't fail to let me know how the health of his lordship is and how yours is. Certainly the more monasteries he has, the more subjects he will have to pray to the Lord our God for him. May it please His Majesty to watch over him as is our need.
5. We are leaving for Burgos tomorrow. May God give you as much of his love as I and these sisters beg of him.
Do not forget me in your holy sacrifices, for the love of our Lord, and do me the favor when you see Doña Luisa de la Cerda to tell her that I am well, for I don't have time to say more.
Today is 8 January.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
