To the most illustrious Señora Doña María de Mendoza, my lady, Valladolid.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be always with your ladyship, amen. Since I wrote to you yesterday, this letter is only to let you know that today they brought me letters from the Duchess of Osuna and from Doctor Ayala urging that one of those young ladies be received; and a Father from the Society who went there to inquire about this has written me a good report on one of them. The other one would be frightened by the austerity. That is why it is good that the one who speaks to aspirants describe the austerity with candor. Nothing more was said about that other one. I have written that the one could be accepted right away. And I mentioned that I had written you about what must be done to give her the habit at once, and that they should inform you as soon as she arrives in Valladolid.
2. I am writing to our Father Visitator, telling him of your desire to receive her and begging his paternity to send you his permission along with this letter. I think he will do so, and if he doesn't, you should immediately write again to him in such a way that no mistake can be made about your request. From what I understand, Father Visitator will not fail to make you happy whenever he can. May our Lord give us the happiness that will last forever and may he always guide you.
3. Today the Bishop sent word that he is better and that he will visit us. Do not be troubled. When will I see you with more freedom? May our Lord bring this about. It is true that we need to help each other. May it please God that when I see you I will find you more in control of yourself, for you have a spirit suited to being so. I think it would be beneficial for you to have me close to you, as it is for me to have our Father Visitator present. As my superior, he tells me the truth, and I -- daring as I am and habituated to having you put up with me -- would do the same with you. I recommend myself to the prayers of my lady, the duchess. The sisters here are fervent in their prayers for you.
Your ladyship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
4. You never mention how you get along with Padre Fray Juan Gutiérrez; some day I will speak to you about it. Please give him my regards. I don't know whether his niece made her profession. It is Father Visitator who gives permission for those who are to make it. Would you inform Mother Prioress about this fact, for I forgot to do so.
