1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. On our arrival in Valladolid, I arranged for the Mother Prioress there to inform you. I remained there four days because I was not well, for on top of a bad cold, I had a slight attack of palsy. Nonetheless, after improving a little, I departed because I feared making your honor wait, as well as those lords -- whose hands I kiss many times. I beg their honors and you as well not to blame me for the delay. If you all knew what the roads were like, you would blame me more for coming. I am also now in pretty bad condition, but I hope in the Lord that this will not prevent me from setting out again shortly if the weather gets a little better. They say that the trip from here to Burgos is an arduous one, and so I don't know if Father Provincial will want to depart until he sees that I am better, even though he is eager to continue the journey. He kisses your hands and has a great desire to meet you. He is very much obliged to pray for you because of all that you do for the order.
2. If it is necessary for you to send us a message, make use of a special messenger, and we will pay the cost here. In matters like this, the cost should not matter much. It could be that if the weather gets better, as it is today, we will leave Friday morning and that a letter sent by ordinary mail will not arrive on time. In case you haven't sent anything or we have already departed, here is how we plan to go.
3. Father Provincial does not want us to fail to see the crucifix in that city, and so they say that before we enter, it is necessary to go there and that from there, or a little before, notify you and go to your house in as hidden a way as possible, and if necessary to wait until nightfall. Then Father Provincial will go to receive the bishop's blessing so that on the next day the first mass may be said. You should know that until this is done, it is better that no one knows. This is what I have been almost always doing. Every time I think of how God has done everything, I am amazed and see that it is all the fruit of prayer. May he be ever praised and pleased to watch over you, for he has surely reserved a great reward for you because of your work.
4. I don't think I accomplished a small feat by bringing Asunción with me, considering the resistance to this. She is happy to come, in my opinion. Her sister is well. I have already told you that we will bring her back soon. The prioress here kisses your hands and so too do the nuns accompanying me. We include the five who will remain there and myself and two companions. In sum, there are eight of us traveling. Don't bother about beds, for we can adapt in any arrangement until we get settled. I find that these angels are pleasant and joyful.
5. May God watch over them and give you many years; don't be distressed over my sickness, for I am often like this, and it usually goes away quickly.
Today is the vigil of St. Anthony.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
