1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. We are getting along well in the hospital, glory to God. I am reminded here of all the merit you gain in yours. It is a great thing to take part in a work like this. Blessed be God who so takes care of the poor. This is indeed consoling to me.
2. The archbishop has sent someone to see me and ask if I need anything. For my consolation he said that finally out of regard for the Bishop of Palencia, for me, and for all those who have been praying for this foundation he will give his authorization -- as soon as we have a house -- for it is out of the question that we go back to where we came from, which makes one suspect that someone asked him to send us back.
3. These fathers are defending themselves vigorously and are complaining about me because I wrote to the lord canon, something they say they would never have done. I don't know who could have told them, although it matters little to me. Now, as soon as we left the house of Catalina de Tolosa, they went to see her. And they sent me word that I shouldn't tire myself in trying to get them to come to see us, for unless their general in Rome gives them orders to do so, they will not come to see us until we have a monastery. They don't want to give the impression that their order and ours is all one order -- look at that for an idea! -- and that half of Palencia is in revolt because of what I wrote. I have recounted this so that Lord Canon Reinoso will know about it and to beg both of you not to try to help me in this regard. They know what they are doing. The day will appear when others will come with a different attitude.
4. The fact is that if we want to make a foundation, we must have a house. And so we are waiting for these sisters to make the renunciation, for until they do so Catalina de Tolosa can do nothing although she would like to. Even while we are here, she showers us with favors and takes wonderful care of us. Now we are conferring about a house for which it is said they are asking two thousand ducats; and that's a gift, for it is very well built, so much so that the sisters will not have to do anything to it for many years. It is however in a bad area. It belongs to Fulano de Mena. But we are not wanted in a place that is very central. There are so few places, that even though the house has some small defects, we desire it very much.
5. I had finished writing this when they sent to tell me that if we didn't have the two thousand ducats we would have to pay nine thousand maravedis in rent -- and would be required to put down six hundred ducats to be redeemed -- which has discouraged us. If we had the means, it would be wonderful, for we would never have to spend anything on it for many years, and a beautiful church is ready. Tell me what you think and how you are. Since I am used to receiving frequent letters from you, I am not resigned to doing less. Let Canon Reinoso take this as addressed to him too. May our Lord watch over your honor for me, as I beg of him, amen.
Today is the first of February.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
