1. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, mi padre. A short time has passed since I wrote you, and our Father Provincial will have already given you an account of what has taken place here with the archbishop and how he said that we must buy a house. Give glory to God, for we have now bought one, and a very good one. We would like to leave this hospital because we are very crowded and would like to see where this whole affair is going to end up.
2. The archbishop said that the house is a good one and that he is pleased with it. But the suspicion of everyone is that he is not about to do anything more than he has done up until now. And so I would like to have authorization from the nuncio to have Mass at home. With this we could endure the long delay. And so I am writing a letter to the duchess to enclose with this one that she might write us a letter of support. Would you read it and send it to her, in charity, sealing it first. Be sure you arrange to receive an answer and send it to Padre Nicolao or to Juan López in Madrid, and put in writing what must be done so that the authorization will be received quickly. Realize that you are doing us the greatest charity, for although the house is near a church, it is hard for us to have to go out to hear Mass.
3. If you think that by your asking the duke in my name, he would respond positively, the authorization might perhaps come more quickly -- and I figure it would be something easy to get. As I said in the letter to the duchess, the house has a chapel, which was not used for anything except the celebration of Mass. But also, the Society had lived in the house where we were wanting to make the foundation and the Blessed Sacrament had been reserved there for fourteen years. The archbishop, however, never allowed us to have Mass there. If you had heard all the nice words about what he desired, you would have thought there was nothing else to do but ask. It doesn't seem it depended on him, for certainly the devil very much regretted our making this foundation. So there is no reason to think the archbishop will give the authorization once we have our own house. We could have to wait a long time before he becomes tired enough to give it to us.
4. I would very much like to know if you gave my letters to those gentlemen and if anything was done. Whatever the case, nothing is lost by trying. In your charity, don't forget to do me this favor.
5. Padre Fray Antonio's manner of proceeding was so painful to me that I decided to write the enclosed letter. If you think he will not resent it too much, seal it and the others as well and send them to him, for I don't know any other way of sending them.
6. Greetings to Licentiate Padilla and to Padre Fray Antonio de la Madre de Dios. These sisters send greetings to you.
May God watch over you and make you as holy as I beg of him.
From Burgos, 18 March.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
