1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your most illustrious lordship. The archbishop was so delighted with your letter that he immediately began to hurry along this project, without anyone's asking him, so that it will be finished before Easter. And he wants to say the first Mass and bless the church. For this reason we will have to wait, I believe, until the final day of the Easter celebration, since the other days are taken. The necessary formalities required by the provisor are already being taken care of; almost nothing is lacking. They are all quite new for me. The priests of the first parish were convoked to see if they had any problem with it. They said that on the contrary they would do all they could for us. It can all now be considered as finished, and so I sent thanks to the archbishop. May God be praised, for it seemed to be an impossible struggle to everyone; although not to me, for I always considered the foundation to be as much as made -- and so I am the one who has suffered the least.
2. All the nuns kiss your hands many times because you have freed them from so great a trial. Their joy and the praises they give to God would be a delight for you to behold. May he be ever praised who gave you so much charity that it was enough to bring you to write the letter to the archbishop. Since the devil saw the benefit that was to come from it, he put up more opposition. But it was all to little avail because our most powerful God will do what he wants.
3. I hope the Lord has given you the health necessary to deal with the great amount of work you have had these days, for I have had this intention very much in mind, and all of us have been praying hard for you. Even though a synod means a lot of work, you do very well to have one, for the Lord will give you the energy for everything. It is of great benefit to the Sisters to have you there, but envious ones are not lacking. And I rejoice in the happy Easter you will have.
4. May our Lord give you happy Easters for many years with as much health, which is something necessary for this whole order, amen.
Today is Good Friday.
The last day of the Easter feast, the first Mass will be said, with God's help. And if the archbishop is able, perhaps before.
Your most illustrious lordship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
