For my dear daughter Sister Leonor de la Misericordia.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your honor, my daughter. Oh, how I wish I had no other letters to write than this answer both to your letter that came through the Jesuits and to the latest one. Believe me, daughter, that every time I see a letter from you, it brings me special delight. So I don't want the devil to tempt you to neglect writing to me.
2. Regarding the temptation that makes you think you are not making progress, you will gain in a wonderful way -- time will provide the testimony. God is leading you as though you were someone he already has within his palace, who he knows will never leave and to whom he desires to give more and more by which you can merit. Up until now it could be that you received those little feelings of tenderness because God in wanting to detach you from everything found this necessary.
3. I remember a saint I knew in Avila, for certainly it was clear that she lived the life of a saint. She had given everything she had to God, but kept a mantle to wear, and afterward she gave that away. Then God granted her a period of great interior trial and dryness. Afterward she complained very much to him and said: "Is this the way you are, Lord? After leaving me with nothing, then you yourself also leave me?" So, my daughter, this is the way His Majesty is, for he repays great services with trials; and there can be no greater pay because those trials make the love of God increase in us.
4. I praise you, for interiorly you are advancing in the practice of virtue. Leave your soul to God; it is his spouse. He will be responsible for it and lead it to the place that most suits it. Also, the novelty of the life and practices seems to drive away that peace, but afterward it will return. Don't be at all distressed by this. Prize being able to help God carry the cross and don't be clinging to delights, for it is the trait of mercenary soldiers to want their daily pay at once. Serve without charge, as the grandees do the king. The king of heaven be with you.
5. Regarding my departure, I am answering Señora Doña Beatriz and will mention the important things.
This Doña Josef of hers is a good soul, certainly, and very much suited for us. But she is so beneficial to that house that I don't know whether it would be right to get her to leave it. So I resist this as much as I can, and I am afraid of stirring up enmities. If the Lord so desires, it will come about.
My regards to those lords, those brothers of yours whom I know.
May God watch over you and make you what I desire.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
6. I forgot to mention how happy our padre was with you (he couldn't finish praising you), and to ask Mother Prioress why they don't move the refectory downstairs, where with wooden platforms things would work out all right. It would involve much work for those who serve the food to have to carry up wood, and water, and all the rest, whereas this other arrangement would seem to be easier to manage.
