To the illustrious Canon Reinoso, Palencia.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. Whenever I see a letter from you, I feel consoled. And it pains me that I cannot give myself frequently the comfort that comes from writing to you. I know that you realize this, and nonetheless it bothers me not to be able to do more.
2. Through my letter to Father Rector Juan del Aguila, which is enclosed and which Mother Prioress will show you, you will learn something of what is going on with the Society, for it truly seems that a manifest enmity is beginning to take shape. And the devil bases it on accusations of things for which they ought to thank me. Truly serious calumnies are being spread, some of which they themselves are responsible for. It all ends up with these despicable interests that they say I wanted and strove after, and it's a relief that they didn't add "thought about." And since I believe that they wouldn't tell a lie, I see clearly that the devil must have a hand in this muddle.
3. Now they told Catalina de Tolosa that they didn't want her to have anything to do with the discalced nuns lest she be contaminated by our manner of prayer. To the devil it must be very important to promote quarrels between us since he has become so active. They also told her that their general was coming here, that he had already disembarked. I recall that he is a friend of Señor Don Francisco. If he could undo these machinations and establish silence by learning the truth, it would be a great service to God. That people so serious should be engaged in such childishness is a pity. Would you look into this and in conformity with what you think apply a remedy.
4. Those papers must be really tiring you. I beg you to send them to me, as soon as you find a very safe means, and pray for me to our Lord. May His Majesty watch over you, as I beg of him, amen.
Today is 20 May. I kiss the hands of both Señor Don Francisco and those ladies, your aunts.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
