For Mother Prioress of the Carmel of St. Joseph. The discalced Carmelite nuns behind San Francisco. Postage, one half real.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, amen, amen. Yesterday I received a letter from you which, although there were only a few lines, brought me the greatest delight, for I was very afflicted over what they told me about so many people dying. I am praying urgently to God for you, as they are doing in all these houses, for I sent to ask them for their prayers. I feel anxious at every moment to think of you amid so many trials.
2. I already knew of the death of Padre Fray Diego, and I praised God that Padre Fray Bartolomé remains, for I was very grieved that he might die, for this would have been a great loss to you. May God be praised for all that he does.
3. I would have liked to have been told of this letter so that my answer could have been in my own hand, but I was informed only now when the letter carrier is ready to leave and my head is very tired, for I have been writing the whole afternoon. But even if they aren't in my own hand, I didn't want to neglect sending these few lines.
4. I haven't mentioned how amused I was by your complaints regarding the Mother Prioress in Granada, and rightly so. For she should rather be thankful for what you did in sending the nuns in so dignified a manner -- and not riding some donkeys, for God and the whole world to see. Even had you sent them by litter, I wouldn't have been upset if nothing else was available. May God preserve you, my daughter, for you did very well. And don't worry about it if someone thinks otherwise. They are only quibbling. She must have been displeased because in the making of that foundation things weren't done according to their plan. But I think everything will be all right. Even if there is some trial, the outcome isn't worse for that reason.
5. This house is in very good condition, well established and paid for, and the nuns for many years will have no need to work to support themselves. So I think I will soon start on my way back to Avila. Pray to God for me. My throat continues as usual, as do my other infirmities.
6. Greetings to Padre Fray Bartolomé and to all the Sisters. Those who are here send you their regards. Pray for Teresa, who is a little saint and has a great desire be a professed nun. May God guide her and preserve you and make you very holy.
From this house of St. Joseph's in Burgos, 6 July.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
