For Mother Prioress of the Carmel of St. Joseph, the discalced nuns behind San Francisco. Seville. Postage, one half real.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter, and protect you for me from all those tribulations and dangers of death.
2. Your letter was a great consolation in that you tell me the nuns are not sick -- not even a headache. It doesn't surprise me that they are well considering the prayers that are offered for them in every house; they even ought to be saints after so many supplications. I at least am ever concerned about all of you and will never forget you. Believe me you must not be ready, since you are not dying along with so many others being removed by God from that city. May the Lord watch over them for me, and over you in particular, for certainly your dying would grieve me terribly. The death of Father Vicar grieved me, and it would have been worse had it been Padre Fray Bartolomé because of how much your house would have missed him. May God be praised for all things, because in every way we are obliged to Padre Bartolomé.
3. I read a letter from Pedro de Tolosa -- which his sister gave me where he says that the situation in that city is improving, which was better news than in your letter. I also told his sister to give him my thanks for what he does for your house. Pray much for him and for his sister, Catalina de Tolosa -- our whole order ought to do this -- for after God this house owes its existence to her, and I think God will be served very much in it. When he comes there, give him my best regards. And pray for me. My health continues as usual.
4. I plan, God willing, to leave at the end of this month for Palencia. Our padre left word there that I should spend a month in that house. Then I must go for the profession of Teresa, for she has finished her year of novitiate and desires to make her profession. Pray for her, you and all the nuns, with great care at this time that God will give her his grace. Consider how she needs it; for although she's lovely, she's only a child after all.
5. I already sent your letter to Padre Fray Pedro de la Purificación, for he is in Alcalá as vice-rector. Our padre left him there when he passed through. And I think he misses him very much. Now, they told me, he is in Daimiel and will be in Malagón, and that he is well, thanks be to God.
6. Many regards to all the sisters and give those who have had relatives who died my condolences and assurance of prayers. Regards in particular to Mother Subprioress, San Jerónimo, and San Francisco. Tell them I would be delighted to write to them if I could, but my health is of no assistance to me, and that is why this is not written in my own hand. I am no worse, however, than usual, but my head is tired and I don't dare push myself with these letters, for there are others required by courtesy that cannot be avoided.
May God be blessed and give you his grace, amen.
It is the fourteenth of July.
7. I received a letter from good Padre Nicolao, which made me happy. He is already in Genoa and feeling fine, for the trip by sea went very well. And he has received news that our most reverend Father General will be there within ten days. Padre Nicolao will discuss all the business matters with him there, and then return without going any further. This made me very happy. Pray for him and for his mother, who has died. He urges us very much to do this, and in your house there you truly owe it to him.
8. For goodness' sake don't fail to write me about how things are going for you. You already see how worried I am, they will forward me your letters from here. May the Lord be pleased to grant me the favor of keeping you in good health and watching over you especially. All the nuns here are well, are happy with how things are going, and send their regards.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
Give my best to Fray Bartolomé.
