To Madre Tomasina Bautista, Burgos.
1. Jesus be with your reverence, mi madre, and make you a saint. I so delighted in your letter that it would seem I hadn't seen you only a few days ago. May God give you health and preserve you for me, also Sister Beatriz de Jesús, whose illness weighed on me very much. I am already praying for her. Tell her this and give her my regards.
2. As for the parlor: when Catalina de Tolosa goes away, close the part that was opened at the time of the flood. And if Catalina de Tolosa remains there, leave it as it is, but do not allow anyone else to have access to it. And as I say, if afterward she should desire to return, there would be little that would have to be removed, just a partition wall. And you could give her a room if she so desires. But a window should be so positioned that the garden cannot be viewed through it. For they have already seen us enough.
3. My throat is better, for I haven't felt so well in days. Since I can eat without any pain hardly, and today there is a full moon, I think it's important. My room is very cool and nice, and the whole house seems nicer than I thought it would. Everything is so neat that it couldn't appear bad.
4. Teresa sends you her regards. She doesn't seem so gracious as she did when in Burgos. All the sisters are well, as is also Mother Prioress. They send you their regards, and I send mine to Mother Subprioress and to all the sisters, and to Catalina de Tolosa, to Beatriz and Lesmitos, to Doña Catalina and her mother, and all the friends. St. Bartholomew sends her best to you and to all the sisters, and to your young ones. As for giving my greetings to friends, you may do it for me always, even if I don't mention it to you. I give you the permission to represent me.
5. I have observed how they do the washing here, using no more than two sisters and thought that you could do this there if María enters, and this would be cheaper for you. Consider this carefully, for I am not suggesting it unless it would be more beneficial. The water there is very good. Isabel could also serve to help María with the wash.
6. I received a letter from Padre Fray Nicolás and he tells of how the general came after ten days as he had said in the other letter. He got along very well with the general and was most willingly and graciously granted what he went for. This is evident by the fact that the general made him his procurator for the entire province of discalced friars and nuns in such a way that everything going to the general must pass through his hands and be submitted to his counsel.
7. Padre Fray Nicolás's brothers got on very well with the general, and so he departed truly satisfied. Since the calced friars saw that Padre Fray Nicolás stayed in their house, they thought that he wanted to become a calced friar and they told him that if he stayed in that house they would make him prior, an office he can't bear the thought of! It could be that he is already back in this country, for he says that he wants to leave at once if he can find room on a ship. Pray much for him and give thanks for the great favor His Majesty has granted us in being in such good graces of the general. Organize a procession and give thanks to the Lord, for now nothing remains for us to do than to be very holy and use these favors for the service of God. May he be with you and give you his grace.
It is the third of August.
8. So that I can be courteous with friends, you will have to forgive this handwriting which belongs to someone else. Since I am not writing to my doctor, he will think that it wasn't possible for me to do so. Kiss his hands for me and tell him the news that makes me so happy, and for goodness' sake may all the nuns be so, since God has granted us so many favors.
May he watch over you, my friend, and make you a saint.
Your reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus
