1. Jesus be with your honor. Blessed be God that Señor Juan de Ovalle is well, for the weakness will pass. The tertian fever has been everywhere. Around here, that's all one finds, although it has left me alone. Everything is daily getting better, glory to God. I have been well this summer. I don't know what the winter will bring, for it is already starting to cause me some disturbance; but when there's no fever, one can put up with it all.
2. Regarding the purchase of the house, I would like to know what was done. From Oropesa they wrote me of the news that the fleet had arrived in Sanlúcar, although this is not certain. I know nothing more. As soon as I know anything about my brother, I will inform you. I have the Perálvarez house ready for him.[
3. I am displeased by those fasts of the prioress. Tell her so, and that this is why I do not want to write to her or have anything to do with her. God deliver me from anyone who wants to do her own will rather than obey. If I can be of help to Señora Doña Ana, out of consideration for Señor Don Cristóbal, I'll do so gladly. We have discussed her staying in the house where Doña Sancha used to live, but it is in such a state that no one could live in it. Here in the Incarnation, no one may enter except as far as the portress's office, nor can the service women go out. Her sisters, I believe, though they would like to help her, could do little for her. Because for five years they have eaten nothing but the bread supplied by the monastery, they are drained of energy -- and Doña Inés is almost always sick. They deeply regret their lack of energy. As for myself, you already know they are so bound by precepts that there is little I can do.
4. Give my best regards to the subprioress. I don't have time to write any more. Isabel Juárez is the one who came from Malagón, and most unwillingly, according to what they say. But having once expressed the desire, she was sent by the prioress; and I think that at some other time the prioress herself will come. I have many cares -- may God provide for them. My regards to Señor Juan de Ovalle and to my dear children. You don't tell me what Beatriz's illness was. May God be with them.
Today is 27 September.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
The discalced friar who is confessor here is doing great good; he is Fray John of the Cross.
