1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I received your letter, but in regard to what you said I can do very little. When I speak about it with Madre Tomasina Bautista, such a change comes over her that from the soles of her feet to the top of her head, she says, she feels upset at the thought of returning to that house. And the reasons she gives why this would disturb the tranquility of her soul are such that no superior would order her to do so. She is now experiencing great peace, living in a very nice house, much to her liking. If you truly love her, you will rejoice over this and not want someone to come to be with you who doesn't want to. May God pardon her, for I desire your happiness so much that I wish it were possible for me to give everything you ask for. For love of God do not be afflicted, for there are many nuns in the order who can make up for the absence of Madre Tomasina.
2. If you are distressed by the thought that Madre Juana del Espíritu Santo will remain as prioress, you need not be, for she has already written me that not for anything in the world would she accept that office again. I don't know what to say about those nuns. I fear that no prioress will last there, for they all take flight. I beg you to consider that this is your house and that God cannot be served where there is disquiet. So, it is very important that you concern yourself with them, for if they are what they should be, what can any prioress do to them? These attachments and childish ways are far from the behavior one expects from discalced nuns, and such conduct does not exist in the other houses. I can more or less figure out which ones are agitating the others, and if God gives me the health, and it is possible, I will try to go there to investigate these machinations. For it is painful for me to learn through a certain source that friars from another order were told of things that should have been kept private and that became the subject of talk even among seculars outside that city. Truly, through their childishness and imperfections, these nuns have done a great wrong to the order, for people will naturally conclude that all the other nuns are like them.
3. I beg you to tell them this and try to promote peace, for soon our padre will be going there. Do me this favor, for whoever is elected must be your servant. I tell you that if I had known some of the things they now tell me, I would have corrected them before. I will now have to do everything possible to provide a remedy.
4. I ask you to show this letter to Padre Pedro Sánchez, and to give him my respects, so that he will reprehend the culpable and not let them receive Communion so frequently. They shouldn't think that it is some small matter to upset the peace of a monastery or talk to outsiders about things so harmful to those whom the world esteems as good nuns. Ah, my lady, how differently things go where the true spirit reigns!
May God give you this spirit and preserve you for us many years with the holiness I desire.
Today is the feast of the Transfiguration.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
