1. Jesus. The Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. I tell you I felt very sorry about the illness of that sister. For, apart from the fact that she is very good, I greatly regret the trial it means for you at this time. Always keep me informed about your health, and be careful about getting too close to her. You can truly cater to and care for her and still follow this counsel. I have already written to you of how necessary it is to have charity for the sick. I know you will have it, but I always give this advice to everyone.
2. Concerning what you say about begging for alms, it disturbed me very much, and I don't know why you are asking me what I want you to do, for I told you so many times when I was there that it wasn't appropriate for us to make known our lack of income, how much less to beg. And even the constitutions say, I think, that only in great need may we beg. You are not in great need, for Señora Catalina de Tolosa told me that little by little she will give you the children's share of the estate. If it were known that you had no income, it would be different. Don't say anything, and God deliver you from begging at this time. You won't gain anything, and what on the one hand you do gain, on the other you will lose in many ways. Rather, speak to those lords for me and tell them about this.
3. I have already written, telling you to give them my regards always. I subscribe in advance to all these good wishes that you extend for me, and so it is not a lie.
4. It's terribly hot here, although this morning it was a little cooler, and I was glad for the sick Sister, for it must also be cooler there. Tell the licentiate Aguiar that even though he enters the monastery every day, he must know how painful it is for me not to see him, for he made me very happy with his letter. But I think he will be happy not to find an occasion to make me write again so soon, and the same goes for Doctor Manso, for it is true, and I always send him my regards and ask him to write and let me know how his health is, and the same with Padre Maestro Mata. They greatly envy a confessor like that here.
5. You should know that the cleric in Arévalo was not the one we thought, and it is he himself who said he would go. I spoke with him yesterday, and we were in agreement.
6. Tell the subprioress and Beatriz, and my little roly-poly, that I was delighted with their letters, but they know they must pardon me from answering when there is no particular reason for doing so; tell the same to Pedro's daughter, and give her my regards. Remain with God, my daughter, and may His Majesty preserve you in the holiness I beg from him for you, amen, amen.
It is Vespers of San Lorenzo.
7. Our padre has written me from Almodóvar. He is well, but it is necessary to pray he not go to Andalusia, for he would be willing to do so. He tells me that he would like me to go to Alba and Salamanca before going to Avila, and I have written to Alba and perhaps I will stay there this winter if possible.
Without any doubt your servant,
Teresa of Jesus
