1. May Jesus give your reverence his grace. I received your letter in Palencia but not in time for me to answer. I am doing so now, although in a great hurry because the bishop who is going to bring this wants to leave. For charity's sake, if he should go there, see to it that everyone treats him very graciously and that you have someone visit him frequently, for we owe him everything.
2. As for what regards the house, what Diego Ortiz desires to do and the plan he presented seems fine to me. If he buys that house, what follows will be very good, and that condition that is necessary in order have the house pertains more to him than to us. Don't worry at all about his trouble, for he's always troubled. Do all you can to gain time.
3. With regard to Madre Brianda de San José's sister, she is not able to be either a nun or a lay Sister, not because she doesn't have good intelligence, or good judgment, or serenity, which she clearly seems to have, but because she can't do anything more than what she is doing, for she is very weak. And according to what she says nothing impedes her from giving herself to God and praying as much as she wants. Her life is set up just right for this. If she has some trials, she will have them elsewhere -- and even greater ones.
4. As for my going there now, I don't know how this could come about, for the trials I have here are frightening, and the business matters are killing me. But God can do everything. Pray to His Majesty for these intentions.
5. Give my best regards to everyone. Because I am in a hurry, I will not enlarge on this; the same reason goes for why this is not in my own hand.
Today is 26 August.
6. At the end of this month, please God, I will be in Avila. This trip by Father Provincial at this time pained me very much. May God be with him. I have already sent a personal courier to Padre Antonio de Jesús with the patent letters. If he accepts and desires to go there, everything will turn out well.
7. As I say, I am very happy with the plan, but you don't tell me how you are going to help Diego Ortiz buy the house. But any help will be worthwhile, if in moderation, and so leave the church free. It is an extremely better plan than the previous one, so you can begin discussing it immediately. And even if one proceeds slowly, building the church little by little with the income, Father Provincial will be pleased, for he takes very much to heart the good of that house. This will be seen later. In sum, I don't think we should neglect buying the house so as to build the church. That can be taken care of afterward. But first you have to see whether what is going to be given will be sufficient.
8. Keep me informed about all the details. I will be here until after the feast of our Lady in September, and then for the rest of the month in Medina. You can write to me at either of these two places.
Regards to everyone, for I am in a great hurry.
Your reverence's servant
Teresa of Jesus
