1. May Jesus give your reverence his grace, watch over you for me, and strengthen you for the many trials he sends you. I tell you, my mother, you are being treated as one who is strong. May God be praised for everything. I am reasonably well, better than usual. I don't believe I'll be here many days. As soon as a messenger whom I am awaiting arrives, I will depart. Pray for me; it weighs on me very much to move farther away from your house and from you.
2. Don't be distressed about Catalina de la Madre de Dios. It's a temptation and will pass away. Don't let her write to anybody. If she wants to write to me or to Ana, all right; but not to anyone else. If for her consolation you let her write, do not send the letters. I am delighted that the rector has gone there. Be very gracious with him and go to confession sometimes to him, and ask them to give the nuns some sermons.
3. Regarding Catalina de Tolosa, don't be surprised, for she is so burdened that first of all you need to console her, and even though she says this today, she won't do it tomorrow. Anyway, I am very much obliged to the licentiate. May God watch over him.
4. Why don't you tell the nuns the news about our padre? Mother Subprioress tells me she desires to know where he is. My regards to her and to all the nuns. I am sorry about María's illness. Blessed be God that you have help from the other Sister. Let me know how she does.
5. I don't know if I will be able to write to the licentiate; since I love him so much, I will consider it recreation to write to him if I have time. Give him my best wishes and also tell the doctor I am loaded down with things to do of a thousand kinds and to pray for me. I tell you that although you free me from the distress of having to know that the nuns are sick, there is no lack of other reasons for being distressed. When I have time I'll write you about some. Note that I don't think that I'll stay here beyond the feast of our Lady, and that the books should reach the prioress in Palencia in time for her to send them to me.
6. May God watch over you for me. I don't have time for more except to ask that you always be careful not to burden the novices with many tasks until you understand what their spirits are capable of. I say this for Catalina's sake who was so overburdened that I am not surprised she was thinking she could no longer bear it. And you need to be compassionate in your speech. You think all the nuns should have your spirit, and you are very much mistaken. And believe that even though you may have an advantage over me in virtue, I have more experience. As a result, some of the things I pointed out, I would not want you to forget. May God watch over you for me; since these things are mentioned as though to my own soul, I would want you to realize that they are not said without reason.
I've already mentioned that I give you the power to extend regards for me to all my friends.
Today is 27 August.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
