1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence. It is not sufficient for you to write me often in order to take away the pain, although it brought me great relief to know that you are well and the region healthy. Please God, this will continue. I have received all your letters, I think.
2. The reasons for your decision to go didn't seem to me to be sufficient. A means could have been found here for giving orders about studies and not hearing the confessions of beatas. In that way those monasteries could have gotten along for two months and you could have put the houses here in good order. I don't know why, but I so felt your absence, at such a time, that I lost the desire to write to you. As a result I didn't do so until now when I cannot avoid it. It is the day of the full moon, for I had a night that was truly wretched, and so too is the condition of my head. Up to now I had been doing better. Tomorrow I think, when the full moon is past, this indisposition will pass. The throat is better, but the trouble doesn't go away.
3. Here I had to put up with a great deal from Don Francisco's mother-in-law, whose behavior is odd and who is determined to initiate a lawsuit against the validity of Lorenzo's will, and although she has no right to anything, many people favor her and some say that she does have a right. And I have been advised that if Don Francisco is to avoid total ruin, and we the expense, that an agreement be reached. This would be detrimental to St. Joseph's. But I hope in God that, since what St. Joseph's has coming to them is assured, the community will receive the entire inheritance. I was eaten up with sadness over this -- and still am -- although Teresa has carried on well. Oh, how she suffered from your not coming. Up until now we have kept it secret. On the one hand I rejoice because she is coming to understand what little reason there is for trust except in God; and even in my case, it didn't do me any harm.
4. Enclosed is a letter from Padre Fray Antonio de Jesús, which he wrote to me. I am surprised that he has turned to being my friend again -- truthfully, I have always considered him to be one. Since we are communicating again everything will go well. Even if this were not so, in no way could someone else be appointed for the elections. I don't know how it is that you didn't realize this, or that now is not the time to found a house in Rome. You don't have nearly enough men for the houses you have here, and Nicolao misses you very much, for I think it is impossible for him to tend to so many things by himself. Fray Juan de las Cuevas told me this, for I spoke with him at times. He has a strong desire that you succeed in everything. And he wishes you well to such an extent that I feel obliged to him. And he even told me that you were going against the chapter ordinances, which prescribed that in not having one's own associate another one be chosen -- I don't know if he said in the opinion of the priors -- and that he considered it impossible for you to do everything alone, that Moses took I don't know how many to assist him. I told him that there were not any capable, that not even enough could be found to fill the office of prior. He answered that this was essential.
5. After I arrived here, they told me to note that you do not like to take talented persons with you. Now I see the reason, how they are needed elsewhere. But since the chapter is approaching, I wouldn't want to see them placing the blame on you. Consider this for the love of God and how you are going about preaching in Andalusia. I never like seeing you spend much time down there. Since you wrote me one day of the trials some underwent, God spares me the pain of seeing you undergo the same; and as you say, the devil does not sleep. At least believe that as long as you are in that region, I will be ill at ease.
6. I don't know for what purpose you have to stay so long in Seville, for they told me you will not be returning until the time of the chapter -- which greatly increased my pain, even more than if you had gone back to Granada. May the Lord direct things for his greater service. There is dire need of a vicar there. If Fray Antonio does well here, you could consider entrusting him with the task. Don't think of becoming an Andalusian; you don't have the temperament for living among them. With regard to preaching, I beg you again that even though you do not preach much, you be very careful about what you say.
7. Do not be disturbed about what happened here concerning that friar. The matter was not as serious as it seemed, and God provided a very good remedy. Nothing about it became known. The prioress is writing to you about how sick the discalced friars are, which is why the patent letter was not given to Fray Juan de Jesús, for it would be inhumane for him to leave them since he is the only one who is well, and he takes care of everything. I stopped by that house in coming here and everything seemed to be in very good order. They enjoy a good reputation in that place.
8. Concerning the matter in Salamanca, there is much to say. I tell you that it was the cause of some rough times for me, and please God a solution has been found. On account of this profession of Teresa it wasn't possible for me to go there, because it wasn't possible to bring her with me and less so to leave her behind. And more time would be needed to go there and then to Alba and return to Avila. Fortunately, though, Pedro de la Banda and Manrique happened to be here. I rented the house for another year; so the prioress can be at peace, and please God this will prove beneficial.
9. I tell you that she is charming. She is so much a woman that she has begun negotiations no more nor less than if she already had the license from you. And to the rector she says that everything she does is for my order (although she doesn't know about this purchase, nor does she want to, as you know) and for me because the rector is doing it at your orders. It's a devil's tangle, and I don't know what her reason is, for she will not lie. But the great longing she has for that miserable house is twisting her mind.
10. Yesterday Fray Diego came from Salamanca (the one who was here with you at the time of the visitation), and he told me that the rector at San Lázaro got involved in that matter against his will for love of me. He even went so far as to say that every time he dealt with the matter he had to go to confession afterward, since it seemed to be so contrary to God's will. But the prioress was so insistent that he couldn't do anything else, and all Salamanca was criticizing the purchase. And Doctor Solís had told her that she couldn't in conscience own it, for it wasn't safe. And that rush in my opinion caused them to resort to cunning so that I wouldn't know, and with the enclosed letter you will see how with the tax included the price came to six thousand ducats. Everyone is saying that it wasn't worth twenty-five hundred ducats and are asking how poor nuns can waste so much money. And what is worse, they don't have it. But in my opinion this is a trick of the devil to destroy the monastery, and so for now what they are trying to do is gain time in order to undo everything little by little.
11. I wrote to Cristóbal Juárez begging him not to do anything more about this until I come, which would be at the end of October. And Manrique wrote the same to the scholastic, who is his good friend. I told Cristóbal Juárez that I wanted to see how he would be paid (for they told me that he was the guarantor) and that I didn't want him to suffer any loss, letting him know that there was nothing with which to pay him. He didn't answer me. Through Padre Fray Antonio de Jesús I am writing him again to try to prevent this. God has allowed that money be loaned to them, otherwise they would have already given it away along with that of Antonio de la Fuente. But just now I received another letter in which the prioress tells me that Cristóbal Juárez has sought the thousand ducats while waiting for Antonio de la Fuente to give them to him, and I am afraid they have deposited them already. Pray to God for this matter that every effort possible will be made.
12. Another serious drawback is that for them to move into the house of Cristóbal Juárez, the students would have to move to the new house of San Lázaro, which would kill them. I wrote to the rector not to give his consent and that I would be keeping my eye on the matter.
13. As for the eight hundred ducats they owe the nuns, don't worry, for Don Francisco says that he will pay them within a year. And the best part of all is that they don't have the money now to give. Have no fears, for I will get it. But it is more important that the students have good accommodations than for the nuns to have so large a house. Where will they find the money now to pay the interest? This whole business leaves me stupefied. If you gave them permission, why do they turn to me after the fact? If you didn't give it to them, how is it that they give away money (they gave five hundred ducats to the daughter of Monroy's brother-in-law)? And how is it they consider the matter to have reached such a stage that the prioress can write and say that it cannot be undone? May God provide a remedy, for I am certain that he will. Don't be disturbed, for we will do everything possible.
14. For love of God be careful about what you do down there. Don't believe the nuns, for I tell you that if they want something they will make you believe a thousand things. And it is better for them to find a little house like poor nuns and enter with humility (for afterward they can find something better) than to be left with many debts. If at times your absence makes me happy, it is to see you free of these problems, for I would much rather go through them alone.
15. In Alba, my letter (in which I told them how annoyed I was and that I was going there) had its good effect. It will be worthwhile for me to do so. With God's favor we will be in Avila at the end of the month. Believe me, it was not fitting to continue bringing this child from place to place. Oh, mi padre, how oppressed I have felt these days. When I learned that you are well, it went away. Please God, you will get even better.
16. My regards to Mother Prioress and to all the Sisters. I am not writing to them because through this letter they will learn about me. I am happy that they are well. I urge them not to bother you, but to care for you. My regards to Padre Fray John of the Cross. St. Bartholomew sends hers to you. May our Lord watch over you, as I beg of him and free you from dangers, amen.
Your servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
