1. May Jesus give your reverence his grace. I received your letter in Palencia at a time when it wasn't possible for me to answer because I was about to continue on my journey. I'm writing from here, and I don't think they will give you the letter I sent to the bishop when he was about to leave so that he could have it delivered to you. (He had so much luggage it wouldn't be surprising if he forgot.) So I will repeat here what I said there. First of all, I ask you to send someone to see the bishop, and do so frequently as long as he is there. And if he should come to the monastery, you must all be most gracious toward him, for we owe him everything.
2. As for what regards the house, what Diego Ortiz desires to do and the plan he presented seems fine to me. If he buys that house, what follows will be very good, and that condition that is necessary in order to have the house pertains more to him than to us. Don't worry at all about his trouble, for he's always troubled. Do all you can to gain time.
3. With regard to Madre Brianda de San José's sister, she is not able to be either a nun or a lay Sister, not because she doesn't have good intelligence, or good judgment, or serenity, which she clearly seems to have, but because she can't do anything more than what she is doing, for she is very weak. And according to what she says, nothing impedes her from giving herself to God and praying as much as she wants. Her life is set up just right for this. If she has some trials; she will have them elsewhere -- and even greater ones.
4. As for my going there now -- I don't know how this could come about, for the trials I have here are frightening and the business matters are killing me. But God can do everything. Many regards to everyone. Because I'm in a hurry, I won't enlarge on this.
Valladolid, 2 September.
5. I feel reasonably well, and I think I will depart on Monday after our Lady's feast. I won't stay in Medina long, so that I can arrive on time in Avila. But I don't think I will be able to remain there long because I will have to go to Salamanca. They are tangled up in the purchase of a house. It is very necessary that I go to them. May God provide a solution and watch over you for me, amen.
Teresa and St. Bartholomew send you their best regards.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
The carrier of this letter is Padre Fray Juan de las Cuevas, who tells me he is going there. Be very gracious to him.
