1. Jesus be with your reverence, my daughter, and watch over you for me. I received your letters and much happiness along with them. In what regards the kitchen and refectory, I would be delighted if you did so, but you who are there can make the best decision as to the arrangement. Work things out as you wish.
2. I am glad that Roque de Huerta's daughter is pleasant. As regards the profession of the Sister you mentioned, I think it is good that it be delayed until when you say, for she's young and it doesn't matter. Don't be surprised if she experiences some setbacks, for at her age these don't amount to much. They happen, but afterward these persons are usually more mortified than others.
3. Tell Sister Leonor de la Misericordia that I would like to do for her what she asks and even more. Would that I could attend her profession. I would do so gladly and it would please me much more than a lot of other things I have to do here ... may God bring this about, if it be for his service.
4. Regarding the foundation, I will not decide to make it unless there is some income, for I see already so little devotion there that we need to proceed in such a way. And the place is so far from all our other houses that a foundation ought not be made if the community is not provided for. Here one community helps another when it sees there is need. It is good to begin in this way and that you come to know and find devoted people. If the work is desired by God, he will move these persons to do more than is being done at present.
5. I will be only a short time in Avila because I cannot neglect going to Salamanca, and you can write to me there. But if the foundation is made in Madrid -- and I am hoping for this -- I would prefer to go there since it is closer to us here. Pray for this intention.
6. Regarding that nun about whom you write, if she should want to go to Palencia, I would be delighted, for they need someone in that house. I am writing to Madre Inés de Jesús so that you and she can come to an agreement about it. As for the Theatines, I am happy you are doing what you can with them, for this is necessary, and the good or the bad, and the graciousness we show them ...
7. Tell Señora Doña Beatriz for me all the things you think would be suitable. I would so like to write to her, but we are about to leave, and I have so many matters to attend to that I don't know where I'm at. May God be served by it all, amen.
8. Do not think that when I mentioned delaying the profession I was giving preference to one novice over the other, for these are worldly considerations that offend me very much, and I wouldn't want you to be looking at things like that. But it is because she is young that I am glad for a delay and so that she may practice more mortification. And if some other interpretation for this delay were made, I would give orders to have the profession at once. For it is good for the humility we profess to be evident in our deeds. I had given precedence to the other knowing that in her humility Sister Leonor de la Misericordia doesn't pay any attention to these worldly points of honor. And this being so, I am truly happy that this child is waiting a little longer before her profession.
9. I can not enlarge any more, for we are about to leave for Medina. I'm feeling as usual. My companions send you their regards. It wasn't long ago that Anne wrote you the news from here. My best regards to all the Sisters. May God make them saints, and you along with them.
Valladolid, the fifteenth of September.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
10. We are now in Medina and so busy that I cannot say more than that the trip went well. The deferring of Isabel's profession must be done with discretion so that it is not thought that anyone is of higher status, for that is not the main purpose of the delay.
