Chapter 5
 
Continues to treat of her great illnesses, of the patience the Lord gave her, and of how He draws good out of evil, as is seen in something that happened to her in that place where she went for a cure.
 
1. I forgot to tell how in the novitiate year I suffered great uneasiness over things that in themselves were of little consequence. Often times I was accused about things without my being at fault. I bore this with a great deal of pain and imperfection; however, because of the deep happiness I felt in being a nun, all passed away. Since they saw me seek out solitude and saw me sometimes weep over my sins, they figured this was caused by discontent, and said so.
I was fond of everything about religious life, but I didn't like to suffer anything that seemed to be scorn. I enjoy being esteemed. I was meticulous about everything I did. It all seemed to me virtue, although this will be no reason for pardon, because I knew in everything what seeking my own happiness was, and thus ignorance is no excuse. The only real excuse could be that the convent was not founded on a strict observance. I, miserable creature that I was, followed after what I saw wrong and left aside the good.
2. There was a nun at that time afflicted with the most serious and painful illness, because there were some holes in her abdomen which caused obstructions in such a way that she had to eject through them what she ate. She soon died from this. I observed that all feared that affliction. As for myself, I envied her patience. I asked God that, dealing with me in like manner, He would give me the illness by which He would be served. It seemed to me that I feared nothing, for I was so set on gaining eternal goods that I determined to gain them by any means whatever. And I am amazed, because I had not yet in my opinion any love of God as I did afterward, it seems to me, when I began to practice prayer. But I had the light that made everything coming to an end seem of little value to me, and it made those goods that can be gained by the love of God seem of great value since they are eternal.
So well did His Majesty hear my prayer that within two years I was so sick that, although this sickness was not the same as the nun's, I don't think it was any less painful or laborious during the three year period that it lasted, as I shall now tell.
3. When the time came for the cure to begin, for I had been waiting at my sister's house, I was brought there with much solicitude for my comfort by my father and sister, and my friend, the nun, who had come with me, for she loved me very dearly. At this point the devil began to upset my soul, although God drew out very much good from this. There was a cleric of excellent intelligence and social status who lived in that place where I went to be cured. He was learned, although not greatly so. I began to confess to him, for I was always fond of learning. Half-learned confessors have done my soul great harm when I have been unable to find a confessor with as much learning as I like. I have come to see by experience that it is better, if they are virtuous and observant of holy customs, that they have little learning. For then they do not trust themselves without asking someone who knows, nor do I trust them; and a truly learned man had never misguided me. Those others certainly could not have wanted to mislead me, but they didn't know any better. I thought that they really knew and that I was obliged to no more than to believe them, especially since what they told me was liberal and permissive. If it had been rigid, I am so wretched that I would have sought out others. What was venial sin they said was no sin at all, and what was serious mortal sin they said was venial. This did me so much harm that it should not surprise anyone that I speak of it here in order to warn others against so great an evil. I see clearly that in God's eyes there is no excuse for me, for that the things by their nature were wrong should have been enough for me to have been on guard against them. It was on account of my sins, I believe, that God permitted these confessors to be mistaken themselves and to misguide me. And I misled many others by telling them what these confessors told me.
I went on in this blindness for I believe more than seventeen years until a Dominican father, a very learned man, enlightened me about many things. And the Jesuit fathers made me fear everything so much, by showing me how wrong those theories were, as I shall tell later.
4. When I began then to confess with this cleric I mentioned, it happened that he became extremely fond of me; for at that time even after I became a nun I had little to confess compared to what I had later on. His affection for me was not bad; but since it was too great, it came to no good. He had learned from me that I was determined not to do anything grave against God for any reason, and he also assured me of the same; and so we conversed a great deal. But I was so fascinated with God at that time what pleased me most was to speak of the things of God. And since I was so young, it threw him into confusion to observe this; and by reason of the strong love he had for me, he began to explain to me about his bad moral state. This was no small matter, because for about seven years he had been living in a dangerous state on account of his affection and dealings with a woman in that same place; and, despite this, he was saying Mass. The association was so public that he had lost his honor and reputation, and no one dared to admonish him about this. To me it was a great pity for I loved him deeply. I was so frivolous and blind that it seemed to me a virtue to be grateful and loyal to anyone who loved me. Damned be such loyalty that goes against the law of God! This is the kind of nonsense that goes on in the world, which makes no sense to me: that we consider it a virtue not to break with a friendship, even if the latter go against God, whereas we are indebted to God for all the good that is done to us. Oh blindness of the world! You would have been served, Lord, if I had been most ungrateful to all that world and not the least bit ungrateful to You! But it has been just the reverse because of my sins.
5. I endeavored to get more information from other persons in his household. I learned more about his bad moral state and saw that the poor man was not so much at fault. For the unfortunate woman had put some charms in a little copper idol she asked him to wear around his neck out of love for her, and no one was influential enough to be able to take this away from him.
I do not believe with certainly that it is true that charms have this power. But I will mention this that I have seen so as to advise men to be on their guard with women who desire to carry on in this way. Men should believe that since these women have lost their shame before God (for women are obliged to modesty more than men), they can be trusted in nothing; for they will stop at nothing so as to hold on to this friendship and passion the devil has placed in them. Even though I have been so wretched, I have never fallen into anything of this sort, nor have I ever tried to do evil; nor, even if I could have, would I ever have desired to force anyone to love me, for the Lord has protected me from this. But if He should have let me, I would have done the evil that in everything else I did, for there is nothing trustworthy in me.
6. Once I knew about this charm, I began to show him more love. My intention was good; the deed bad. For in order to do good, no matter how great, one should not commit the slightest wrong. I used to speak with him very often about God. This must have profited him, although I rather believe that it prompted him to love me greatly. For in order to please me, he finally gave me the little idol, which I then threw in a river. Once he got rid of this, he began -- like someone awaking from a deep sleep -- to recall everything he had done during those years. And being frightened about himself and grieving over his bad moral state, he at last began to abhor the woman. Our Lady must have helped him greatly, for he was most devoted to her Immaculate Conception; and he celebrated this feast with great solemnity. Finally, he stopped seeing her entirely, and he never tired of thanking God for having given him light.
Exactly one year from the first day I met him, he died. He was very devoted to the service of God, for I never thought that the great affection he bore me was wrong, although it could have been more pure. But there were also occasions on which, if we had not remained very much in God's presence, there would have been more serious offenses. As I said, once I understood a thing to be a mortal sin, I then avoided it; and it seems that his observing this in me helped him to love me. For I believe that all men must be more friendly toward women who they see are inclined toward virtue. And this is the means whereby women ought to gain more of what they are seeking from men, as I shall say later. I am certain that he is on the path of salvation. He died a very good death and completely detached from that occasion. It seems the Lord desired that by these means he would be saved.
7. With the severest afflictions, I spent three months in that place, for the cure was too harsh for my constitution. After two months, because of the potent medicines, my life was almost at an end. The severity of the heart pains, which I went to have cured, was more acute. For sometimes it seemed that sharp teeth were biting into me, so much so that it was feared I had rabies. With the continuous fever and the great lack of strength (for because of nausea I wasn't able to eat anything, only drink), I was so shriveled and wasted away (because for almost a month they gave me a daily purge) that my nerves began to shrink causing such unbearable pains that I found no rest either by day or by night -- a very deep sadness.
8. Seeing such poor results, my father brought me back to where doctors could come to see me. They all gave up hope for me, for they said that on top of all this sickness, I was also tubercular. I cared little about this diagnosis. The pains were what exhausted me, for they were like one continuous entity throughout my whole body, from head to foot. Pain of the nerves is unbearable, as doctors affirm, and since my nerves were all shrunken, certainly it was a bitter torment. How many merits could I have gained, were it not for my own fault!
I remained in this excruciating state no more than three months, for it seemed impossible to be able to suffer so many ills together. Now I am amazed; and I consider the patience His Majesty gave me a great favor from the Lord, for this patience was clearly seen to come from Him. It greatly profited me to have read the story of Job in St. Gregory's Morals. For it seems the Lord prepared me by this means, together with my having begun to experience prayer, so that I could be able to bear the suffering with so much conformity to His will. All my conversations were with Him. I kept these words of Job very habitually in my mind and recited them: Since we receive good things from the hand of the Lord, why do we not suffer the evil things? This it seems gave me strength.
9. Then the feast of our Lady in August came. The torment had been going on since April, but it was worse during the latter three months. I hastened to go to confession, for I always liked to confess frequently. They thought I was afraid of dying, and so that I would not become troubled my father would not allow me to confess. Oh, love, too excessive, springing from flesh and blood; even though from so Catholic and prudent a father (for he was every bit of this, and his action did not arise from ignorance), it could have done me great harm! That night I suffered a paroxysm in which I remained for four days, or a little less, without any feeling. At this time they gave me the sacrament of the anointing of the sick, and from hour to hour or moment to moment they thought I was going to die; they did nothing but recite the Creed to me, as if I were able to understand them. At times they were so certain I was dead that afterward I even found the wax on my eyes.
10. The sorrow my father felt for not having let me confess was great -- many outcries and prayers to God. Blessed be He who desired to hear them! For after the grave in my convent was open for a day and a half awaiting arrival of the body, and the funeral rites were already celebrated at a monastery of our friars outside the city, the Lord allowed me to return to consciousness. Immediately I desired to confess. I received Communion with many tears, though it seems to me these tears were not caused by sorrow for having offended God, which would have been sufficient for salvation, but for the mistake I made on account of those who told me certain things were not mortal sins, which I afterward clearly saw were. The pains that remained were unsupportable -- the contrition imperfect, although the confession was integral, including, in my opinion, everything I understood to have been an offense against God. For among other favors His Majesty has given me since my first Communion, there is this one: that I never fail to confess what I think is a sin even though venial. But without a doubt it seems to me that my salvation would have been in jeopardy if I should have then died since on the one hand my confessors were so poorly educated and on the other hand I was wretched, and for many other reasons.
11. Truly and certainly it seems to me that I am so startled in arriving at this part of my life and in seeing how apparently the Lord raised me from the dead that I am almost trembling within myself. I think it was good, O my soul, that you beheld the danger from which the Lord delivered you. And if out of love you do not give up offending Him, may you do so out of fear lest on any other of a thousand occasions He might let you die in a more dangerous state. I don't believe I'm adding much by saying "any other of a thousand," although I may be scolded by the one who commanded me to be moderate in telling about my sins; and they are being really beautified.
For the love of God I beg him not to cut out anything having to do with my faults, for this is where the magnificence of God and what He endures from a soul is seen more clearly. May He be blessed forever. May it please His Majesty that I die rather than ever cease to love Him.

CHAPTER 6
 
Treats of how much she owes the Lord for having given her conformity to His will in the midst of such severe trials and how she took the glorious St. Joseph for her mediator and advocate, and of the great good he did for her.
 
1. Such were these four days I spent in this paroxysm that only the Lord can know the unbearable torments I suffered within myself: my tongue, bitten to pieces; my throat unable to let even water pass down -- from not having swallowed anything and from the great weakness that oppressed me; everything seeming to be disjointed; the greatest confusion in my head; all shrivelled and drawn together in a ball. The result of the torments of those four days was that I was unable to stir, not an arm or a foot, neither hand nor head, unable to move as though I were dead; only one finger on my right hand it seems I was able to move. Since there was no way of touching me, because I was so bruised that I couldn't endure it, they moved me about in a sheet, one of the nuns at one end and another at the other.
This lasted until Easter. My only relief was that if they did not touch me, the pains often stopped, and on account of this bit of rest, I considered myself already well; for I was fearful I would lose patience. And so I was very happy to be without such sharp and continuous pains, although the quartan fevers that remained with their accompanying severe chills were so harsh that I found them unbearable; the lack of appetite was very great.
2. Right away I was in such a hurry to return to the convent that I made them bring me back as I was. The one they expected to be brought back dead they received alive; but the body, worse than dead, was a pity to behold. The state of my weakness was indescribable, for I was then only bones. I may add that the above condition lasted for more than eight months. The paralysis, although it gradually got better, lasted almost three years. When I began to go about on hands and knees, I praised God. With great conformity to His will, I suffered all those years and -- if not in these early sufferings -- with great gladness. For it was all a trifle to me in comparison with the pains and torments suffered in the beginning. I was very conformed to the will of God, and I would have remained so even had He left me in this condition forever. It seems to me that all my longing to be cured was that I might remain alone in prayer as was my custom, for in the infirmary the suitable means for this was lacking. I went to confession very often. I spoke much about God in such a way that I was edifying to everyone, and they were amazed at the patience the Lord gave me. For if this patience had not come from the hand of His Majesty, it seemed it would have been impossible to suffer so much with so great contentment.
3. It was a great thing that He had granted me the favor in prayer which He did, for this made me understand the meaning of love for Him. For within that short time I saw some new virtues arise in me (although they were not strong since they were insufficient to sustain me in righteousness): not speaking evil of anyone, no matter how slight, but ordinarily avoiding all fault-finding. I was very much aware that I should not desire to say of another person what I would not want him to say of me. I was extremely cautious about this in the occasions there were -- although not so perfectly that I did not sometimes fail a little when the occasions were very great; but ordinarily I was faithful. And thus I so persuaded those who associated with me that they acquired the habit. It became generally known that where I was present there was no talking behind anyone's back, and this was the opinion of my friends, relatives, and all those I had taught. Nevertheless in other matters I will have to render an account to God for the bad example I gave them.
May His Majesty be pleased to pardon me, for I have been the cause of many evils but not with the intention of doing all the harm that was afterward the outcome of my deeds.
4. There remained in me the desire for solitude and a fondness for conversing and speaking about God. If I found someone with whom to speak thus, it gave me more happiness and recreation than all the suave -- coarse, to use a better word -- conversation of the world. I received Communion and confessed much more often and desired to do so. I liked to read good books very much, and felt the deepest repentance after having offended God. For often, I recall, I did not dare pray, because I feared as I would a severe punishment the very bitter sorrow I would have to feel at having offended God. This went on increasing afterward to such an extreme that I don't know what to compare the torment to. This feeling did not in any way spring from fear, but since I remembered the favors the Lord granted me in prayer and the many things I owed Him, and I saw how badly I was repaying Him, I could not endure it. And seeing my lack of amendment, I became extremely vexed about the many tears I was shedding over my faults, for neither were my resolutions nor were the hardships I suffered enough to keep me from placing myself in the occasion and falling again. They seemed fraudulent tears to me, and afterward the fault appeared to be greater, because I saw the wonderful favor the Lord bestowed in giving me these tears and such deep repentance. I endeavored to go to confession right away and, in my opinion, I did what I could to return to God's grace.
The whole trouble lay in not getting at the root of the occasions and with my confessors who were of little help. For had they told me of the danger I was in and that I had the obligation to avoid those friendships, without a doubt I believe I would have remedied the matter. For in no way would I have endured being in mortal sin even for a day should I have understood that to be the case.
All these signs of fear of God came to me during prayer; and the greatest sign was that they were enveloped in love, for punishment did not enter my mind. This carefulness of conscience with respect to mortal sin lasted all during my illness. Oh, God help me, how I desired my health so as to serve Him more, and this health was the cause of all my harm.
5. Since I saw myself so crippled and still so young and how helpless the doctors of earth were, I resolved to go for aid to the doctors of heaven that they might cure me. For I still desired my health, even though I bore the illness with much happiness. And I thought sometimes that if in being well I were to be condemned, I would be better off this way. But nonetheless I thought I would be able to serve God much better if I were in good health. This is our mistake: not abandoning ourselves entirely to what the Lord does, for He knows best what is fitting for us.
6. I begin to attend Mass and to recite devotional prayers that were highly approved, for I never cared for other devotions that some people practice, especially women, with those ceremonies, intolerable to me, but to them an aid for their devotion. Afterward I came to understand that they were not suitable devotions but superstitious ones. I took for my advocate and lord the glorious St. Joseph and earnestly recommended myself to him. I saw clearly that as in this need so in other greater ones concerning honor and loss of soul this father and lord of mine came to my rescue in better ways than I knew how to ask for. I don't recall up to this day ever having petitioned him for anything that he failed to grant. It is an amazing thing the great many favors God has granted me through the mediation of this blessed saint, the dangers I was freed from both of body and soul. For with other saints it seems the Lord has given them grace to be of help in one need, whereas with this glorious saint I have experience that he helps in all our needs and that the Lord wants to us understand that just as He was subject to St. Joseph on earth -- for since bearing the title of father, being the Lord's tutor, Joseph could give the Child command -- so in heaven God does whatever he commands.
This had been observed by other persons, also through experience, whom I have told to recommend themselves to him. And so there are many who in experiencing this truth renew their devotion to him.
7. I endeavored to celebrate his feast with all the solemnity possible. But, in my desire to do so very carefully and well, I was filled more with vanity than with spirituality, though my intention was good. This was a fault I had, that if the Lord gave me the grace to do something good, what I did was filled with imperfections and many failures. In wrongdoing, curiosity, and vanity, I was especially skilled and diligent. May the Lord pardon me.
8. Because of my impressive experience of the goods this glorious saint obtains from God, I had the desire to persuade all to be devoted to him. I have not known anyone truly devoted to him and rendering him special services who has not advanced more in virtue. For in a powerful way he benefits souls who recommend themselves to him. It seems to me that for some years now I have asked him for something on his feast day, and my petition is always granted. If the request is somewhat out of line, he rectifies it for my greater good. If I were a person who had authority for writing I would willingly and in a very detailed way enlarge upon what I am saying about the favors his glorious saint did for me and for others. But so as to do no more than what they gave me the command to do, I will be briefer in many matters than I desire, more extensive in others than necessary -- in sum, like one who has little discretion in anything that is good. I only ask for the love of God anyone who do not believe me to try, and he will see through experience the great good that comes from recommending oneself to this glorious patriarch and being devoted to him. Especially persons of prayer should always be attached to him. For I don't know how one can think about the Queen of Angels and about when she went through so much with the Infant Jesus without giving thanks to St. Joseph for the good assistance he then provided them both with. Anyone who cannot find a master to teach him prayer should take this glorious saint for his master, and he will not go astray. Please God I may not have erred in being so bold as to speak about him, for although publicly I am devoted to him, I have always been lacking in serving and imitating him. For he being who he is brought it about that I could rise and walk and not be crippled; and I being who I am used this favor badly.
9. Who would have claimed I would so quickly fall after so many gifts from God, after His Majesty had begun to give me virtues which themselves roused me to His service, after I had seen myself almost dead and in such serious danger of being condemned, after having been raised up body and soul so that all who saw me were amazed to see me alive! What is this, my Lord! Must we live in so dangerous a life? For in writing this it seems to me that with Your favor and through Your mercy I can say what St. Paul said, although not with such perfection, that I no longer live but that You, my Creator, live in me. The reason is that for some years now, insofar as I can understand, You have held me by Your hand, and I see in myself desires and resolutions -- and in some way have received proof of them through experience with many things during these years -- not to do anything against Your will no matter how small; although I must offend Your Majesty in many ways without knowing it. And also it seems to me that no task to be done for love of You could be given me without my accomplishing it with great determination. And in some tasks You have helped me carry them out. I do not desire the world or any part of it; nor, it seems, does anything make me happy unless it comes from You, and the rest seems to me a heavy cross.
I could well be mistaken, and so it could be that I do not possess what I have spoken of, but You see well, my Lord, that insofar as I can understand I am not lying. And I fear -- and with every reason -- lest You abandon me. For now I know what happens to my strength and little virtue if You are not always giving and helping me so that I do not forsake You. May it please Your Majesty that even now while all this comes to mind I may not be separated from You.
I don't know why we desire to live since everything is so uncertain. It seemed to me impossible, my Lord, to abandon You so completely. And since I did forsake You so many times, I cannot but fear. For when You withdrew a little from me, I fell to the ground. May you be blessed forever! Although I abandoned You, You did not abandon me so completely as not to turn to raise me up by always holding out Your hand to me. And often times, Lord, I did not want it; nor did I desire to understand how often You called me again, as I shall now tell.
