CHAPTER 10
 
Begins to tell about the favors the Lord granted her in prayer, of how we ourselves can help, and how important it is that we understand the graces the Lord gives us. Asks the one to whom this is sent to keep secret what she writes about from here on, for they commanded her to speak so personally about the favors the Lord grant her.
 
1. I sometimes experienced, as I said, although very briefly, the beginning of what I will now speak about. It used to happen, when I represented Christ within me in order to place myself in His presence, or even while reading, that a feeling of the presence of God would come upon me unexpectedly so that I could in no way doubt He was within me or I totally immersed in Him. This did not occur after the manner of a vision. I believe they call the experience "mystical theology." The soul is suspended in such a way that it seems to be completely outside itself. The will loves; the memory, it seems to me, is almost lost; the intellect does not work discursively, in my opinion, but is not lost. For, as I say, the intellect does not work, but it is as though amazed by all it understands because God desires that it understand, with regard to the things His Majesty represents to it, that it understands nothing.
2. Before this, I felt very habitually a tenderness that, it seems to me, can in part be acquired, a favor that is neither entirely of the senses nor entirely spiritual. Everything is given by God, but it seems we can help a great deal to receive this tenderness by considering our lowliness and the ingratitude we have shown toward God, the many things He did for us, His Passion with such heavy sorrows, His life so afflicted, and by delighting in the sight of His works, His grandeur, how He loves us, and in the many other things that those who truly want to improve spiritually are often able to find all around them, even though they do not seek to do so deliberately. If some love accompanies this activity, the soul is gladdened, the heart is touched with tenderness, and tears begin to flow. Sometimes it seems we draw forth the tears through our own effort, at other times it seems the Lord grants them to us, since we are unable to resist them. Apparently, His Majesty repays us for that bit of care with a gift as great as is the consolation He gives a soul when it sees that it weeps for so great a Lord. And I am not surprised, for He surpasses reason in bestowing consolation: He comforts here; He gladdens there.
3. It seems to me the following comparison that now comes to mind is a good one, for these joys of prayer must be like those of heaven. Since souls do not see more than what the Lord, in conformity with their merits, desires them to see -- and they see their few merits -- they are happy with the place they have, even though there is the greatest difference in heaven between one joy and another. This difference is far more than the difference here below between some spiritual joys and others, which is very great.
Truly, in the beginning when God grants it this favor, it almost seems to the soul that there is nothing more for it to desire, and it considers itself well repaid for all its service. It is more than right, for one of these tears that, as I say, we almost acquire ourselves -- although without God nothing is accomplished -- cannot be bought in my opinion with all the trials in the world; for much is gained by these tears. And what greater gain is there than to have evidence that we are pleasing God? Thus they who reach this point praise God much and know themselves to be very indebted. For now it seems, if they don't turn back, that they are chosen for God's own house and kingdom.
4. Let them pay no attention to the kinds of humility, which I will discuss later, in which it seems to some that it is humility not to acknowledge that God is giving them gifts. Let us understand most clearly the real fact: God gives them to us without any merit on our part. And let us thank His Majesty for them, because, if we do not acknowledge we are receiving them, we will not awaken ourselves to love. And it is very certain that while we see more clearly that we are rich, over and above knowing that we are poor, more benefit comes to us, and even more authentic humility. Anything else would amount to intimidating the spirit, making it believe that it isn't capable of great blessings, so that when the Lord begins to give them to it, it starts to get frightened about vainglory. Let us believe that He who gives us the blessings will give us the grace so that when the devil begins to tempt us in this way we shall understand and have the fortitude to resist -- I mean, if we walk with sincerity before God, aiming at pleasing Him alone and not people.
5. It is very obvious that we love others more when we often recall the good works they do for us. If it is permissible, and therefore meritorious, to keep always in mind that we have our being from God, that He created us from nothing and sustains us, and all the other benefits flowing from His death and trials -- for long before He created us He obtained them for each one now living -- why would it not be permissible for me to see and understand and often consider that I ordinarily used to speak about vanities and that now the Lord has given me the desire to speak of nothing but Him? Here is a jewel by which, in recalling that it is a gift and that we possess it, we are compelled to love the giver. For love is the genuine fruit of prayer when prayer is rooted in humility. What then will happen when they see in their power other precious jewels, like those some servants of God have already received, of contempt of the world and even of themselves? It is clear that they must consider themselves more indebted and obliged to serve and to understand that we have no right to any of this, and to know the generosity of the Lord. For to a soul as poor and wretched and without merit as mine, for which the first of these jewels was enough, and more than enough, He desired to grant more riches; more than I knew how to desire.
6. It is necessary to draw out strength again for service and to strive not to be ungrateful. For the Lord gives these riches under this condition that if we do not use well the treasure and high state in which he places us, He will take them from us and we shall be left poorer. And His Majesty will give the jewels to someone who will display them and gain profit from them, both for himself and for others.
For how can people benefit and share their gifts lavishly if they do not understand that they are rich? In my opinion, it is impossible because of our nature for those who don't know they are favored by God to have enthusiasm for great things. We are so miserable and so inclined to earthly things that those who do not understand they have a pledge of heavenly things will find it hard to abhor in fact and with detachment everything here below. By these gifts, the Lord gives us the fortitude that by our sins we are losing. If people don't have, along with a living faith, some pledge of the love God has for them, they will not desire to be despised and belittled by everyone and have all the other great virtues that the perfect possess. For our nature is so dead that we go after what we see in the present. Thus these very favors are what awaken faith and strength it. Now it could be that, since I am so wretched I am judging others by myself, others may find they have need of no more than the truth of faith in order to perform very perfect works -- and I, being so miserable, have had need of everything.
7. They will say whether this is so or not, I am speaking about what has happened to me, as I have been ordered to do. And if what I say isn't worthwhile, the one I'm sending it to will tear it up, for he will understand what is of little worth better than I. I beseech him for the love of the Lord to publish what I have said up to this point about my wretched life. I now give this permission to him and to all my confessors, for he to whom this is being sent is one of them. And if they desire they may publish it while I am still alive that the world may no longer be deceived, for it thinks there is some good in me. And most certainly and truly I say, according to what I now know about myself, that their publishing this would give me great consolation.
As for what I say from here on, I do not give this permission; nor do I desire, if they should show it to someone, that they tell who it is who has experienced these things, or who has written this. As a result, I will not mention my name or the name of anyone else, but I will write everything as best I can so as to remain unknown, and this I ask for the love of God. These persons so learned and serious in mind will suffice for giving credibility to any good thing if the Lord gives me the grace to say it, because if it is good it will be His and not mine. For I am without learning or a good life, without instruction from a learned man or from any other person (for only those who commanded me to write this know that I am writing it, and at present they are not here), and almost stealing time, and regretfully because it prevents me from spinning and this is a poor house with many things to be done. For even though the Lord may have given me greater capability and memory so that I might thereby have been able to profit from what I have heard or read, I have retained very little of it. Thus if I should say something good, the Lord wills it for some good; what is bad will be from me, and your Reverence will strike it out. Neither in the one instance nor in the other would there be any gain in my telling my name. It is clear that during my life no good should be said of me. After my death there would be no reason for doing so; but rather goodness would lose prestige, and no credit would be given to it for being said of so wretched and base a person.
8. And with the thought that your Reverence will do this that I'm asking you, for the love of the Lord, and that others who read it also will do so, I am writing freely. Otherwise I would have great scruples, with the exception of writing about my sins, for in such a matter I have no scruples. As for everything else, just being a woman is enough to have my wings fall off -- how much more being both a woman and wretched as well. And thus what amounts to more than simply giving an account of my life, your Reverence may judge -- since you so importuned that I write some statement about the favors granted me by God in prayer -- as to its conformity with the truths of our holy Catholic faith. And if it should not be in conformity with them, your Reverence may burn it immediately, for I would submit to it being burned. And I shall speak of what is taking place in me so that when it is conformed to this faith, it may bring some profit to your Reverence; and if it is not, you will free my soul from illusion so that the devil may not be gaining where it seems to me that I am gaining. For the Lord well knows, as I shall afterward say, that I have always tried to find someone who would give me light.
9. As much as I desire to speak clearly about these matters of prayer, they will be really obscure for anyone who has not had experience. I'll speak of some things that as I understand them are obstacles to progress along this path and other things in which there is danger. These things I'll say from what the Lord has taught me through experience and through discussions with very learned men and persons who have lived the spiritual life for many years. It will be seen that within only twenty-seven years in which I have practiced prayer His Majesty has given me the experience -- along with my walking amid so many stumbling blocks and so poorly on this path -- that for others took forty-seven or thirty-seven years; they journeyed in penance and always in virtue.
May His Majesty be blessed for everything and served by me on account of who He is. For my Lord knows well that in writing this I have no other aim than that He be praised and extolled a little when it is seen that in so filthy and malodorous a dungheap He should make a garden with so many delicate flowers. May His Majesty be pleased that through my own fault I do not pull them up again and let the garden return to what it was. I beg for the love of God that your Reverence pray for this since you know more clearly what I am than you have allowed me to tell here.

CHAPTER 11
 
Tells of the reason for the failure to reach the perfect love of God in a short time. Begins to explain through a comparison four degrees of prayer. Goes on to deal here with the first degree. The doctrine is very beneficial for beginners and for those who do not have consolations in prayer.
 
1. Well, let us speak now of those who are beginning to be servants of love. This doesn't seem to me to mean anything else than to follow resolutely by means of this path of prayer Him who has loved us so much. To be a servant of love is a dignity so great that it delights me in a wonderful way to think about it. For servile fear soon passes away if in this first state we proceed as we ought. O Lord of my soul and my good! When a soul is determined to love You by doing what it can to leave all and occupy itself better in this divine love, why don't You desire that it enjoy soon the ascent to the possession of perfect love? I have poorly expressed myself. I should have mentioned and complained that we ourselves do not desire this. The whole fault is ours if we don't soon reach the enjoyment of a dignity so great, for the perfect attainment of this true love of God brings with it every blessing. We are so miserly and so slow in giving ourselves entirely to God that since His Majesty does not desire that we enjoy something as precious as this without paying a high price, we do not fully prepare ourselves.
2. I see clearly that there is nothing on earth with which one can buy so wonderful a blessing. But if we do what we can to avoid becoming attached to any earthly thing and let all our care and concern be with heavenly things, and if within a short time we prepare ourselves completely, as some of the saints did, I believe without a doubt that in a very short time this blessing will be given to us. But it seems to us that we are giving all to God, whereas the truth of the matter is that we are paying God the rent or giving Him the fruits and keeping for ourselves the ownership and the root. We resolve to be poor -- and this is very meritorious -- but then very often turn back to being anxious and diligent about possessing not only the necessities but superfluities as well and about winning friends who might provide these things for us. And we are thereby placed in a state of greater anxiety -- and perhaps danger -- about not being in want than we were before when we had our own possessions.
It also appears to us that we are renouncing our status when we become religious or that we renounce it when we begin to live a spiritual life and follow the path of perfection. No sooner is some little point of etiquette concerning our status brought up than we forget we have already offered it to God; and we desire to take it right back out of His hands, so to speak, after having made Him, as it seemed, the Lord of our wills. So it is with everything else.
3. What a charming way to seek the love of God! And then we desire it with our hands full, as they say. We have our attachments since we do not strive to direct our desires to a good effect and raise them up from the earth completely; but to have many spiritual consolations along with attachments is incongruous, nor does it seem to me that the two can get along together. Since we do not succeed in giving up everything at once, this treasure as a result is not given to us all at once. May it please the Lord that drop by drop He may give it to us, even though it cost us all the trials in the world.
4. Indeed a great mercy does He bestow on anyone to whom He gives the grace and courage to resolve to strive for this good with every ounce of energy. For God does not deny Himself to anyone who perseveres. Little by little He will measure out the courage sufficient to attain this victory. I say "courage" because there are so many things the devil puts in the minds of beginners to prevent them in fact from starting out of this path. For he knows the damage that will be done to him in losing not only that one soul but many others. If beginners with the assistance of God struggle to reach the summit of perfection, I believe they will never go to heaven alone; they will always lead many people along after them. Like good captains they will give whoever marches in their company to God. The devil puts so many dangers and difficulties into the beginner's head that no little courage, but a great deal, is necessary in order not to turn back -- and a great deal of assistance from God.
5. Speaking now of the initial stages of those who are determined to seek out this good and embark on this enterprise (for I shall speak afterward of the other stages I began to mention in regard to mystical theology, which I believe it is called), the greatest labor is in the beginning because it is the beginner who works while the Lord gives the increase. In the other degrees of prayer the greatest thing is enjoying; although whether in the beginning, the middle, or the end, all bear their crosses even though these crosses be different. For all who follow Christ, if they don't want to get lost, must walk along this path that He trod. And blessed be the trials that even here in this life are so superabundantly repaid.
6. I shall have to make use of some comparison, although I should like to excuse myself from this since I am a woman and write simply what they ordered me to write. But these spiritual matters for anyone who like myself has not gone through studies are so difficult to explain. I shall have to find some mode of explaining myself, and it may be less often that I hit upon a good comparison. Seeing so much stupidity will provide some recreation for your Reverence.
It seems now to me that I read or heard of this comparison -- for since I have a bad memory, I don't know where or for what reason it was used, but it will be all right for my purposes. Beginners must realize that in order to give delight to the Lord they are starting to cultivate a garden on very barren soil, full of abominable weeds. His Majesty pulls up the weeds and plants good seed. Now let us keep in mind that all of this is already done by the time a soul is determined to practice prayer and has begun to make use of it. And with the help of God we must strive like good gardeners to get these plants to grow and take pains to water them so that they don't wither but come to bud and flower and give forth a most pleasant fragrance to provide refreshment for this Lord of ours. Then He will often come to take delight in this garden and find His joy among these virtues.
7. But let us see now how it must be watered so that we may understand what we have to do, the labor this will cost us, whether the labor is greater than the gain, and for how long it must last. It seems to me the garden can be watered in four ways. You may draw water from a well (which is for us a lot of work). Or you may get it by means of a water wheel and aqueducts in such a way that it is obtained by turning the crank of the water wheel. (I have drawn it this way sometimes -- the method involves less work than the other, and you get more water). Or it may flow from a river or a stream. (The garden is watered much better by this means because the ground is more fully soaked, and there is no need to water so frequently -- and much less work for the gardener). Or the water may be provided by a great deal of rain. (For the Lord waters the garden without any work on our part -- and this way is incomparably better then all the others mentioned).
8. Now, then, these four ways of drawing water in order to maintain this garden -- because without water it will die -- are what are important to me and have seemed applicable in explaining the four degrees of prayer in which the Lord in His goodness has sometimes placed my soul. May it please His goodness that I manage to speak about them in a way beneficial for one of the persons who ordered me to write this, because within four months the Lord has brought him further than I got in seventeen years. This person has prepared himself better, and so without any labor of his own the flower garden is watered with all these four waters, although the last is still not given except in drops. But he is advancing in such a way that soon he will be immersed in it, with the help of the Lord. And I shall be pleased if you laugh should this way of explaining the matter appear foolish.
9. Beginners in prayer, we can say, are those who draw water from the well. This involves a lot of work on their own part, as I have said. They must tire themselves in trying to recollect their senses. Since they are accustomed to being distracted, this recollection requires much effort. They need to get accustomed to caring nothing at all about seeing or hearing, to practicing the hours of prayer, and thus to solitude and withdrawal -- and to thinking on their past life. Although these beginners and the others as well must often reflect upon their past, the extent to which they must do so varies, as I shall say afterward. In the beginning such reflection is even painful, for they do not fully understand whether or not they are repentant of their sins. If they are, they are then determined to serve God earnestly. They must strive to consider the life of Christ -- and the intellect grows weary in doing this.
These are the things we can do of ourselves, with the understanding that we do so by the help of God, for without this help as is already known we cannot have so much as a good thought. These things make up the beginning of fetching water from the well, and please God that it may be found. At least we are doing our part, for we are already drawing it out and doing what we can to water these flowers. God is so good that when for reasons His Majesty knows -- perhaps for our greater benefit -- the well is dry and we, like good gardeners, do what lies in our power, He sustains the garden without water and makes the virtues grow. Here by "water" I am referring to tears and when there are no tears to interior tenderness and feelings of devotion.
10. But what will they do here who see that after many days there is nothing but dryness, distaste, vapidness, and very little desire to come to draw water? So little is the desire to do this that if they don't recall that doing so serves and give pleasure to the Lord of the garden, and if they aren't careful to preserve the merits acquired in this service (and even what they hope to gain from the tedious work of often letting the pail down into the well and pulling it back up without any water), they will abandon everything. It will frequently happen to them that they will even be unable to lift their arms for this work and unable to get a good thought. This discursive work with the intellect is what is meant by fetching water from the well.
But, as I am saying, what will the gardener do here? He will rejoice and be consoled and consider it the greatest favor to be able to work in the garden of so great an Emperor! Since he knows that this pleases the Lord and his intention must be not to please himself but to please the Lord, he gives the Lord much praise. For the Master has confidence in the gardener because He sees that without any pay he is so very careful about what he was told to do. This gardener helps Christ carry the cross and reflects that the Lord lived with it all during His life. He doesn't desire the Lord's kingdom here below or ever abandon prayer. And so he is determined, even though this dryness may last for his whole life, not to let Christ fall with the cross. The time will come when the Lord will repay him all at once. He doesn't fear that the labor is being wasted. He is serving a good Master whose eyes are upon him. He doesn't pay any attention to bad thoughts. He considers that the devil also represented them to St. Jerome in the desert.
11. These labors take their toll. Being myself one who endured them for many years (for when I got a drop of water from this sacred well I thought God was granting me a favor), I know that they are extraordinary. It seems to me more courage is necessary for them than for many other labors of this world. But I have seen clearly that God does not leave one, even in his life, without a large reward; because it is certainly true that one of those hours in which the Lord afterward bestowed on me a taste of Himself repaid, it seems to me, all the anguish I suffered in persevering for a long time in prayer.
I am of the opinion that to some in the beginning and to others afterward the Lord often desires to give these torments and the many other temptations that occur in order to try His lovers and know whether they will be able to drink the chalice and help Him carry the cross before He lays great treasures within them. I believe His Majesty desires to bring us along this way for our own good so that we may understand well what little we amount to. The favors that come afterward are of such great worth that He desires first that before He gives them to us we see by experience our own worthlessness so that what happened to Lucifer will not happen to us.
12. My Lord, what do You do but that which is for the greater good of the soul You understand now to be Yours and which places itself in Your power so as to follow You wherever You go, even to death on the cross, and is determined to help You bear it and not leave You alone with it?
Those who see in themselves this determination have no reason, no reason whatsoever, to fear. Spiritual persons, you have no reason to be afflicted. Once you are placed in so high a degree as to desire to commune in solitude with God and abandon the pastimes of the world, the most has been done. Praise His Majesty for that and trust in His goodness who never fails His friends. Conceal from your eyes the thought about why He gives devotion to one after such a few days and not to me after so many years. Let us believe that all is for our own greater good. Let His Majesty lead the way along the path He desires. We belong no longer to ourselves but to Him. He grants us a great favor in wanting us to desire to dig in His garden and be in the presence of its Lord who certainly is present with us. Should He desire that for some these plants and flowers grow by the water they draw, which He gives from this well, and for others without it, what difference does that make to me? Do, Lord, what You desire. May I not offend You. Don't let the virtues be lost, if You only out of Your goodness have already given me some. I desire to suffer, Lord, since You suffered. Let Your will be done in me in every way, and may it not please Your Majesty that something as precious as Your love be given to anyone who serves you only for the sake of consolations.
13. It should be carefully noted -- and I say this because I know it through experience -- that the soul that begins to walk along this path of mental prayer with determination and that can succeed in paying little attention to whether this delight and tenderness is lacking or whether the Lord gives it (or to whether it has much consolation or no consolation) has traveled a great part of the way. However much it stumbles, it should not fear that it will turn back, because the building has been started on a solid foundation. This is true because the love of God does not consist in tears or in this delight and tenderness, which for the greater part we desire and find consolation in; but it consists in serving with justice and fortitude of soul and in humility. Without such service it seems to me we would be receiving everything and giving nothing.
14. In the case of a poor little woman like myself, weak and with hardly any fortitude, it seems to me fitting that God lead me with gifts, as He now does, so that I might be able to suffer some trials He has desired me to bear. But when I see servants of God, men of prominence, learning, and high intelligence make so much fuss because God doesn't give them devotion, it annoys me to hear them. I do not mean that they shouldn't accept it if God gives it, and esteem it, because then His Majesty sees that this is appropriate. But when they don't have devotion, they shouldn't weary themselves. They should understand that since His Majesty doesn't give it, it isn't necessary; and they should be masters of themselves. They should believe that their desire for consolation is a fault. I have experienced and seen this. They should believe it denotes imperfection together with a lack of freedom of spirit and the courage to accomplish something.
15. Although I lay great stress on this because it is very important that beginners have such freedom and determination, I am not saying it so much for beginners as for others. For there are many who begin, yet they never reach the end. I believe this is due mainly to a failure to embrace the cross from the beginning; thinking they are doing nothing, they become afflicted. When the intellect ceases to work, they cannot bear it. But it is then perhaps that their will is being strengthened and fortified, although they may not be aware of this.
We should think that the Lord is not concerned about these inabilities. Even though they seem to us to be faults, they are not. His Majesty already knows our misery and our wretched nature better than we do ourselves, and He knows that these souls now desire to think of Him and love Him always. This determination is what He desires. The other affliction that we bring upon ourselves serves for nothing else than to disquiet the soul, and if it was incapable before of engaging in prayer for one hour, it will be so now for four. Very often this incapacity comes from some bodily disorder. I have a great deal of experience in this matter, and I know that what I say is true because I have considered it carefully and discussed it afterward with spiritual persons. We are so miserable that our poor little imprisoned soul shares in the miseries of the body; the changes in the weather and the rotating of the bodily humors often have the result that without their fault souls cannot do what they desire, but suffer in every way. If they seek to force themselves more during these times, the bad condition becomes worse and lasts longer. They should use discernment to observe when these bodily disorders may be the cause, and not smother the poor soul. They should understand that they are sick. The hour of prayer ought to be changed, and often this change will have to continue for some days. Let them suffer this exile as best they can. It is a great misfortune to a soul that loves God to see that it lives in this misery and cannot do what it desires because it has as wretched a guest as is this body.
16. I have said they should use discernment because sometimes the devil is the cause. And so it isn't always good to abandon prayer when there is great distraction and disturbance in the intellect just as it isn't always good to torture the soul into doing what it cannot do.
There are other exterior things like works of charity and spiritual reading, although at times it will not even be fit for these. Let it then serve the body out of love of God -- because many other times the body serves the soul -- and engage in some spiritual pastimes such as holy conversations, provided they are truly so, or going to the country, as the confessor might counsel. Experience is a great help in all, for it teaches what is suitable for us; and God can be served in everything. His yoke is easy, and it is very helpful not to drag the soul along, as they say, but to lead it gently for the sake of its greater advantage.
17. So I return to the advice -- and even if I repeat it many times this doesn't matter -- that it is very important that no one be distressed or afflicted over dryness or noisy and distracting thoughts. If people wish to gain freedom of spirit and not be always troubled, let them begin by not being frightened by the cross, and they will see how the Lord also helps them carry it and they will gain satisfaction and profit from every thing. For, clearly, if the well is dry, we cannot put water into it. True, we must not become neglectful; when there is water we should draw it out because then the Lord desires to multiply the virtues by this means.

CHAPTER 12
 
Continues the discussion of this first stage. Tells about how far we can get, with the help of God, through our own efforts, and about the harm that results when the spirit desires to ascend to supernatural things before the Lord grants them.
 
1. What I tried to explain in the previous chapters -- although I digressed a great deal in speaking of other things since mentioning them seemed to me very necessary -- was the work we can do through our own efforts and how in obtaining this initial devotion we can help ourselves in some way. For in thinking about and carefully examining what the Lord suffered for us, we are moved to compassion; and this sorrow and the resulting tears bring delight. In thinking about the glory we hope for, the love the Lord bore us, and His resurrection, we are moved to a joy that is neither entirely spiritual nor entirely of the senses. But the joy is virtuous and the sorrow very meritorious. Virtue and merit are found in all the things that cause the devotion acquired partly by the intellect, even though this devotion could not be merited or obtained if God did not give it. It is very good for a soul that hasn't gone beyond this point to refrain from striving to ascend further. This should be kept in mind, for otherwise the soul wouldn't make progress but would suffer harm.
2. In this state it can make many acts to awaken love, many resolutions to render God much service, and other acts in order to make the virtues grow, in accord with what is said in a book called The Art of Serving God, which is a very good and appropriate book for those who are in this state in which the intellect is at work. The soul can place itself in the presence of Christ and grow accustomed to being inflamed with love for His sacred humanity. It can keep Him ever present and speak with Him, asking for its needs and complaining of its labors, being glad with Him in its enjoyments and not forgetting Him because of them, trying to speak to Him, not through written prayers but with words that conform to its desires and needs.
This is an excellent way of making progress, and in a very short time. I consider that soul advanced who strives to remain in this precious company and to profit very much by it, and who truly comes to love this Lord to whom we owe so much.
3. As a result, we shouldn't care at all about not having devotion -- as I have said -- but we ought to thank the Lord who allows us to be desirous of pleasing Him, even though our works may be weak. This method of keeping Christ present with us is beneficial in all stages and is a very safe means of advancing in the first degree of prayer, of reaching in a short time the second degree, and of walking secure against the dangers the devil can set up in the last degrees.
4. Keeping Christ present is what we of ourselves can do. Whoever would desire to pass beyond this point and raise the spirit to an experience of spiritual consolations that are not given would lose both the one and the other, in my opinion; for these consolations belong to the supernatural. And if the intellect is not active, the soul is left very dry, like a desert. Since this edifice is built entirely on humility, the closer one comes to God the more progress there must be in this virtue; and if there is no progress in humility, everything is going to be ruined. It seems a kind of pride to desire of ourselves to ascend higher since, in view of what we are, God does too much just in drawing us near to Himself.
It should not be thought that I am saying this about an ascent by means of reflection to the high things of heaven or of God and of the grandeurs that are there and of His great wisdom. I never reflected in this way, because I did not have the ability, as I said, and I was so wretched. Even in respect to thinking of earthly things, God gave me the favor to understand the truth that my reflecting on them would require no small amount of boldness, and how much more for heavenly things. Yet, other persons will draw profit from such reflection, especially if they have gone through studies. For in my opinion a background of studies is like a treasure to aid in this practice if the studies are accompanied by humility. Some days ago I saw the truth of this statement in the case of a few learned men. They began only a short time ago, and they have advanced very far. This makes me most anxious that many learned men would become spiritual men, as I shall say afterward.
5. What I say about not ascending to God unless He raises one up is language of the spirit. He who has had some experience will understand me, for I don't know how to describe this being raised up if it isn't understood through experience. In mystical theology, which I began to describe, the intellect ceases to work because God suspends it, as I shall explain afterward if I know how and He gives me His help to do so. Taking it upon oneself to stop and suspend thought is what I mean should not be done; nor should we cease to work with the intellect, because otherwise we would be left like cold simpletons and be doing neither one thing nor the other. When the Lord suspends the intellect and causes it to stop, He Himself gives it that which holds its attention and makes it marvel; and without reflection it understands more in the space of a Creed than we can understand with all our earthly diligence in many years. Trying to keep the soul's faculties busy and thinking you can make them be quiet is foolish.
And I say again, even though it may not be understood, this effort to suspend the intellect is not very humble. Although there may be no fault, there is no lack of a penalty; labor will be wasted, and the soul will be left with some little frustration, as in the case of a person who when about to leap forward is pulled back by someone else. For now, seemingly, the soul has used its energy and finds that it hasn't achieved what it wanted to achieve with it. And whoever desires to observe will see in the small gain that results this tiny lack of humility I mentioned. For humility has an excellent feature: when it is present in a work, that work does not leave in the soul a feeling of frustration.
It seems to me I have explained this matter, but perhaps I've made it clear only to myself. May the Lord by means of experience open the eyes of those who read this; no matter how little such experience may be, they will soon understand.
6. Many years passed by in which I read a lot of things and didn't understand anything of what I read. For a long time, even though God favored me, I didn't know what words to use to explain His favors; and this was no small trial. In a way amazing to me, His Majesty when He desires teaches me everything in a moment.
One thing I can truthfully say: although I spoke with many spiritual persons who wanted to explain what the Lord was giving me so that I would be able to speak about it, my dullness was truly so great that their explanations benefited me neither little nor much. Or maybe, since His Majesty has always been my Master, it was the Lord's desire that I have no one else to thank. May He be blessed forever because it is very disconcerting for me to speak in all truth about His favors. Without my desiring or asking (for in this matter of understanding these favors I have by no means been curious -- it would have been a virtue to have been so -- as I have been in regard to other vanities), God gave me in a moment completely clear understanding so that I knew how to explain His favor in a way that amazed me more than it did my confessors; for I understood better than they my own dullness. This clear understanding was given me a little while ago, and so what the Lord has not taught me I do not strive to know unless it be something touching upon matters of conscience.
7. Once again I counsel that it is very important for the spirit not to ascend unless the Lord raise it up. What this statement means is quite apparent. It would be especially bad for women to try to raise up the spirit because the devil would be able to cause some illusion; although I am certain the Lord would not allow any harm to come to someone who strives humbly to reach Him. On the contrary, such a person would draw out more benefit and gain where the devil thought he could bring her to ruin.
Since this path of beginners is much traveled and the counsels I have given are very important, I have enlarged on them very much. They have been written of so much better by others, and I confess that I have written this with a great deal of embarrassment and shame although not with as much as I should have.
May God be blessed for everything, who desires and consents that someone like myself should speak about His graces, so lofty and so sublime.

CHAPTER 13
 
Continues with this first state and gives advice concerning some temptations the devil at times causes. The advice is very helpful.
 
1. It has occurred to me to speak about some temptations I have observed in beginners -- I myself have had some -- and to give certain advice that to me seems necessary.
Now strive in the beginning to walk in joy and freedom, for there are some persons who think their devotion will go away if they become a little distracted. It is good to walk in fear of self so as to avoid trusting oneself either little or much when entering into an occasion where God is usually offended. This fear is most necessary until we are whole in virtue. If a temptation comes from human nature, there are few who can consider themselves so strong as to be negligent. Always, as long as we live, even for the sake of humility, it is good to know our miserable nature. But, as I said, there are many reasons why it is permitted to take recreation -- even so as to be able to return with greater strength to prayer. Discretion is required in everything.
2. Have great confidence, for it is necessary not to hold back one's desires, but to believe in God that if we try we shall little by little, even though it may not be soon, reach the state the saints did with His help. For if they had never determined to desire and seek this state little by little in practice they would never have mounted so high. His Majesty wants this determination, and He is a friend of courageous souls if they walk in humility and without trusting in self. I have not seen any cowardly soul or any of these who under the pretext of humility remain along the bottom of this path who do not take many years to advance as far as these courageous ones do in a few. I marvel at how important it is to be courageous in striving for great things along this path. For though the soul is not yet strong enough, it nonetheless takes flight and goes very high although like a little fledgling it soon tires and stops.
3. In the past I frequently kept in mind St. Paul's words that all things can be done in God. I understood clearly that of myself I couldn't do anything. Understanding this helped me very much; and also what St. Augustine says; give me, Lord, what You command, and command what You desire. I often thought that St. Peter didn't lose anything when he threw himself into the sea, even though he grew frightened afterward. These first acts of determination are very important, although in this initial stage it is necessary to hold back a little and be bound by discretion and the opinion of a spiritual master. But souls should be careful that he isn't the kind that will teach them to be toads or that will be satisfied in merely showing them how to catch little lizards. Let humility always go first so as to understand that this strength does not come from ourselves.
4. But it is necessary that we know what this humility is like. I believe the devil harms people who practice prayer and prevents them from advancing by causing them to misunderstand humility. He makes it appear to us that it's pride to have great desires and want to imitate the saints and long to be martyrs. Then he tells us or causes us to think that since we are sinners the deeds of the saints are for our admiration, not our imitation. This I admit too. But we must distinguish what is to be admired from what is to be imitated. It wouldn't be good for weak and sickly people to take up much fasting and harsh penance and go off to desert places where they could neither sleep nor have anything to eat, or for them to do similar things. But we should think that we can with God's help strive to have great contempt for the world, disesteem of honor, and detachment from our possessions. We have such stingy hearts that it seems to us we're going to lose the earth if we desire to neglect the body a little for the sake of the spirit. Then it seems to be a help toward recollection to be secure in the possession of necessities because concern about these necessities is a disturbance to prayer. It makes me sad that we have so little confidence in God and so much self love that these concerns should disturb us. And so it is that where the spirit is prospering as poorly as this a few trifles are as bad a trial to us as other trials caused by great and very important things. And yet in our judgment we presume that we are spiritual!
5. It seems to me now that this manner of procedure is a desire to reconcile body and soul so as to preserve one's rest here below and enjoy God up above. And if we walk in justice and cling to virtue, this will come about -- but we would be advancing at the speed of a hen! Never in this way will one reach freedom of spirit. This is a very good way it seems to me for those who are in the married state and must live in conformity with their calling. But for the other state, in no way do I desire such kind of progress nor will anyone convince me it is good; for I have tried it; and I would never have moved if the Lord in His goodness had not taught me another shortcut.
6. Although in this matter of desires I have always had great ones, I strove for what I have mentioned: both to practice prayer and to live for my own pleasure. I believe that if I might have had someone to make me fly, I would have turned the desires into deeds more quickly. But on account of our sins, so few and so rare are the spiritual masters who are not excessively discreet in these matters that I believe it is one of the main reasons why beginners do not advance more rapidly to high perfection. For the Lord never fails, nor should He be blamed. We are the failures and miserables ones.
7. Also we can imitate the saints in seeking solitude and silence and many other virtues that will not kill these woeful bodies that seek so concertedly to take away these virtues in order to disconcert the soul; and the devil does a great deal to incapacitate us when he sees a little fear. He wants no more than to make us think that everything is going to kill us and injure our health. Even tears, he causes us to think, will make us go blind. I went through this, and so I know. I don't understand what better sight or health we can desire than to lose them for a reason like this. Since I am so sickly, I was always tied down without being worth anything until I determined to pay no attention to the body or to my health. Now what I do doesn't amount to much; but since God desired that I understand this trick of the devil, who put the thought in my head that I would lose my health, I said: What difference does it make if I die; or at the thought of rest, I answered: I no longer need rest but the cross; and so with other thoughts. I have seen clearly that on very many occasions, even though I am in fact very sickly, that it was a temptation from the devil or from my own laziness -- for afterward when I wasn't so cared for and pampered, I had much better health.
So it is very important in the initial stages of prayer not to be intimidated by thoughts; and believe me in this matter because I know it through experience. And that others might learn from my difficulties, I can even be of benefit to them by telling these faults of mine.
8. Another temptation is then very common. Since they begin to enjoy the serenity and gain that comes, they desire everyone else to be very spiritual. To desire this is not wrong. Striving to bring it about could have unhappy results if there is not a lot of discretion and simulation, doing so in such a way that one does not appear to be teaching. Whoever should have to work toward something beneficial in this area must have strong virtues so as not to give temptation to others.
This happened to me -- and so I understand it -- when, as I said, I strove to get others to practice prayer. Since on the one hand they heard me speak wonderful things about the great good contained in the practice of prayer and on the other hand they observed my great poverty in respect to the virtues, I believe I was a source of temptation and confusion for them. And with every reason! Afterward they finally told me they didn't know how the one was compatible with the other. And the reason for their considering what in itself was wrong to be all right was that they saw that I who they thought was good sometimes did it.
9. And this confusion is the work of the devil, for apparently he makes use of the good virtues we have to authorize as much as he can the evil he is pursuing. For, no matter how small it may be, when there is question of a community, he must gain readily -- how much more in that the wrong I did was very great. As a matter of fact, in the course of many years only three profited from what I said to them. And later when the Lord had given me more strength in virtue, many profited within two or three years, as I shall afterward say. Moreover, there is another great disadvantage: a gradual backsliding on the part of the soul. The most we have to strive for in the beginning is to care for oneself alone and consider that there is nothing on earth but God and oneself -- and this practice is very beneficial.
10. The devil tempts them in another way through distress over the sins and failings of others. (And all these temptations come from a zeal for virtue which it is necessary to understand and be careful about). He puts it in their heads that this distress stems only from the desire that God not be offended and from concern for His honor; and next they seek a remedy. This desire disquiets them so much that it hinders their prayers; and the greatest harm lies in their thinking this distress amounts to virtue, perfection, and great zeal for God. I am not speaking about distress over the public sins of a Congregation -- if they should become a common practice -- or about the harm that comes to the Church from these heresies that give rise to the loss of so many souls. Such sorrow is very good; and since it is very good, it does not disquiet.
But the safe path for the soul that practices prayer will be not to bother about anything or anyone and to pay attention to itself and to pleasing God. This is important -- ah, if I should have to speak of the mistakes I have seen happen by trusting in the good intention! But let us strive always to look at virtues and good deeds we see in others and cover their defects with the thought of our own great sins. This is a manner of acting that, although we cannot do so with perfection right away, gradually gains for us a great virtue, that is: considering all others better than ourselves. In this way with the help of God one begins to acquire this virtue, for it is necessary in all things; and when it is lacking, all our efforts are useless. Let us beseech Him to give us this virtue, for He will not refuse it to anyone who does his best.
11. This advice should be kept in mind also by those who reason a great deal with the intellect, deducing many ideas from one idea and working with concepts. Those like myself who cannot work with the intellect don't need any advice other than to be patient until the Lord gives them light and something to be occupied with. These persons can do so little with their intellects by themselves that any other counsel would hinder them rather than help them.
But returning to those who practice discursive reflection, I say they should not pass the whole time thinking. For, although discursive reflection is very meritorious, they don't seem to realize that since their prayer is delightful there should ever be a Sunday or a time in which one is not working; but they think such time is lost. I consider this loss a great gain. But, as I have said, they should put themselves in the presence of Christ and, without tiring the intellect, speak with and delight in Him and not wear themselves out in composing syllogisms; rather, they should show Him their needs and the reason why He doesn't have to allow us to be in His presence. The discursive reflection they can do at one time, and the other acts at another, so that the soul may not grow tried of always eating the same food. These acts are very delightful and helpful if one's taste becomes accustomed to them. They contain a great amount of sustenance giving the soul life and many benefits.
12. I wanted to explain myself further because these matters concerning prayer are all difficult and if one doesn't find a master for himself, they are very hard to understand. As a result, even though I want to be brief and just touching upon them is enough for someone with good intelligence (like the one who ordered me to write about these matters of prayer), my dullness of mind does not allow me to explain in a few words something it is so important to explain well. For since I suffered so much, I pity those who begin solely with books because it is strange how different what one understands is from what one afterward sees through experience.
But to return to what I was saying: let us begin to think about an episode of the Passion, let's say of when our Lord was bound to the pillar. The intellect goes in search of reasons for better understanding the great sorrows and pain His Majesty suffered in that solitude and many other things that the intellect if it works hard, can herein deduce. How much more if it is the intellect of a learned man! This is the method of prayer with which all must begin, continue, and finish; and it is a very excellent and safe path until the Lord leads one to other supernatural things.
13. I say "all," but there are many souls that benefit more by other meditations than those on the sacred Passion. For just as there are many mansions in heaven, there are many paths. Some persons find it helpful to think about hell, others about death; some if they have tender hearts experience much fatigue if they always think about the Passion, and they are refreshed and helped by considering the power and grandeur of God in creatures -- and the love He bore us, and its manifestation in all things. This is an admirable method of procedure as long as one often reflects on the Passion and life of Christ from which has come and continues to come every good.
14. Beginners need counsel so as to see what helps them most. For this reason a master is very necessary providing he has experience. If he doesn't, he can be greatly mistaken and lead a soul without understanding it nor allowing it to understand itself. For since it sees that there is great merit in being subject to a master, it doesn't dare depart from what he commands it. I have come upon souls intimidated and afflicted for whom I felt great pity because the one who taught them had no experience; and there was one person who didn't know what to do with herself. Since they do not understand spiritual things, these masters afflict soul and body and obstruct progress. One of these souls spoke to me about a master who held her bound for eight years and wouldn't let her go beyond self knowledge; the Lord had already brought her to the prayer of quiet, and so she suffered much tribulation.
15. This path of self knowledge must never be abandoned, nor is there on this journey a soul so much a giant that it has no need to return often to the stage of an infant and a suckling. And this should never be forgotten. Perhaps I shall speak of it more often because it is very important. There is no stage of prayer so sublime that it isn't necessary to return often to the beginning. Along this path of prayer, self knowledge and the thought of one's sins is the bread with which all palates must be fed no matter how delicate they may be; they cannot be sustained without this bread. It must be eaten within bounds, nonetheless. Once a soul sees that it is now submissive and understands clearly that it has nothing good of itself and is aware both of being ashamed before so great a King and of repaying so little of the great amount it owes Him -- what need is there to waste time here? We must go on to other things that the Lord places before us; and there is no reason to leave them aside, for His Majesty knows better than we what is fitting for us to eat.
16. So it is very important that the master have prudence -- I mean that he have good judgment -- and experience; if besides these he has learning, so much the better. But if one cannot find these three qualifications together, the first two are more important since men with a background in studies can be sought out and consulted when there is need. I say that if these learned men do not practice prayer their learning is of little help to beginners. I do not mean that beginners shouldn't consult learned men, for I would rather a spirit without prayer than one that has not begun to walk in truth. Also, learning is a great thing because learned men teach and enlighten us who know little; and, when brought before the truths of Sacred Scripture, we do what we ought. May God deliver us from foolish devotions.
17. I want to explain myself further, for I believe I'm getting mixed up in many things. I've always had this fault of not knowing how to explain myself, as I have said, except at the cost of many words. A nun begins to practice prayer. If a foolish and whimsical person is directing her, he will explain that it is better for her to obey him than her superior. He does this without malice but thinks he is doing right, because if he is not a religious, such advice will seem to be good. And when dealing with matters in the home if the person is a married woman, he will tell her that it is better to remain in prayer if it displeases her husband. Thus he doesn't know how to arrange time or things so that they be conformed to truth. Since he lacks the light himself, he doesn't know how to enlighten others even though he may want to do so. And although it seems that learning is not necessary for such knowledge, my opinion has always been and will be that every Christian strive to speak if possible with someone who has gone through studies; and the more learned the person the better. Those who walk the path of prayer have a greater need for this counsel; and the more spiritual they are, the greater their need.
18. Let not the spiritual person be misled by saying that learned men without prayer are unsuitable for those who practice it. I have consulted many learned men because for some years now, on account of a greater necessity, I have sought them out more; and I've always been a friend of men of learning. For though some don't have experience, they don't despise the Spirit nor do they ignore it, because in Sacred Scripture, which they study, they always find the truth of the good spirit. I hold that the devil will not deceive with illusions the person of prayer who consults learned men, unless this person wants to be deceived, because the devils have a tremendous fear of that learning which is accompanied by humility and virtue; and they know they will be discovered and go away with a loss.
19. I have said this because there are opinions going around that learned men if they are not spiritual are of no help to people who practice prayer. I have already said that it is necessary to have a spiritual master; but if he is not a learned man, this lack of learning will be a hindrance. It will be a great help to consult with learned men. If they are virtuous even though they may not experience spiritual things, they will benefit me; and God will enable them to explain what they must teach -- He will even give them spiritual experience so that they might help us. I do not say this without having experienced it, and it has happened to me with more than two. I say that if individuals are going to submit completely to only one master, they would be greatly mistaken if they did not seek one like this since if he is a religious he must be subject to his superior. For perhaps the master will be lacking all the three qualities of a good master, which will be no small cross, especially if the soul is unwilling to submit to one with poor judgment. At least I haven't been able to submit in this way myself; nor do I think such submission is fitting. But those who belong to the laity, let them praise God that they can choose someone to whom they may be subject and not lose this very virtuous freedom. Let them, however, postpone having a master until a suitable person is found, for the Lord will provide one on the condition that all is founded upon humility and the desire to do the right thing. I praise God greatly, and women and those who haven't gone through studies must always be infinitely grateful to Him that there be someone who by means of so many labors has attained that truth which ignorant people don't know.
20. I often marvel thinking about learned men, religious especially, who after the labor it cost them to acquire their knowledge use it to help me for nothing more than my asking them -- and that there are persons who don't want to benefit from this labor! May God never allow this to happen! I see these men subject to the hardships of religious life, which are great, with its penances and bad food, subject to obedience -- so that often it puts me to shame, certainly; then together with all this, the lack of sleep; everything a trial, everything a cross. It seems to me it would be a great wrong to lose so much good through one's own fault. And it may be that some of us who are free of these hardships and receive this knowledge already prepared and served, as they say, and living as we please, think that just because we spend a little more time in prayer, we merit more than those who have undergone so many labors.
21. May You be blessed, Lord, who have made me so unable and unprofitable! But I praise You very much because You awaken so many to awaken us. Our prayer for those who give us light should be unceasing. In the midst of tempests as fierce as those the Church now endures, what would we be without them? If some have gone bad, the good ones shine more brilliantly. May it please the Lord to keep them in His hands and help them so that they might help us, amen.
22. I have wandered greatly from the subject I began to speak about. But everything is a subject for beginners that their journey on so lofty a road might begin on the true road. Now returning to what I was saying about Christ bound at the pillar; it is good to reflect awhile and think about the pains He suffered there, and why, and who he is, and the love with which He suffered them. But one should not always weary oneself in seeking these reflections but just remain there in His presence with the intellect quiet. And if we are able we should occupy ourselves in looking at Christ who is looking at us, and we should speak, and petition, and humble ourselves, and delight in the Lord's presence, and remember that we are unworthy of being there. When we can do this, even though it may be at the beginning of prayer, we will derive great benefit; and this manner of prayer has many advantages -- at least my soul derived them.
I don't know if I have been successful in speaking about this. Your Reverence will be the judge. May it please the Lord that I succeed in always giving Him pleasure, amen.

CHAPTER 14
 
Begins to explain the second degree of prayer in which the Lord now starts to give the soul a more special kind of consolation. Explains how this experience is supernatural. This matter is worth noting.
 
1. It has been explained now how the garden is watered by labor and the use of one's arms, drawing the water up from the well. Let us speak now of the second manner, ordained by the Lord of the garden, for getting water; that is, by turning the crank of a water wheel and by aqueducts, the gardener obtains more water with less labor; and he can rest without having to work constantly. Well, this method applied to what they call the prayer of quiet is what I now want to discuss.
2. Here the soul begins to be recollected and comes upon something supernatural because in no way can it acquire this prayer through any efforts it may make. True, at one time it seemingly got tired turning the crank, and working with the intellect, and filling the aqueducts. But here the water is higher, and so the labor is much less than that required in pulling it up from the well. I mean that the water is closer because grace is more clearly manifest to the soul.
In this prayer the faculties are gathered within so as to enjoy that satisfaction with greater delight. But they are not lost, nor do they sleep. Only the will is occupied in such a way that, without knowing how, it becomes captive; it merely consents to God allowing Him to imprison it as one who well knows how to be the captive of its lover. O Jesus and my Lord! How valuable is Your love to us here! It holds our love so bound that it doesn't allow it the freedom during that time to love anything else but You.
3. The other two faculties help the will to be capable of enjoying so much good -- although sometimes it happens that even though the will is united, they are very unhelpful. But then it shouldn't pay any attention to them; rather it should remain in its joy and quietude. Because if the will desires to gather in these faculties, they both get lost. They are like doves that are dissatisfied with the food the owner of the dovecot gives them without their having to work. They go to look for food elsewhere, but they find it so scarce that they return. And thus these faculties go away and then come back to see if the will might give them what it enjoys. If the Lord desires to throw them some food, they stop; and if not, they return to their search. And they must think they are benefiting the will; and sometimes in desiring the memory or imagination to represent to the will what they're enjoying, they do the will harm. Well, then, be advised to behave toward them as I shall explain.
4. All this that takes place here brings with it the greatest consolation and with so little labor that prayer does not tire one, even though it lasts for a long while. The intellect's work here is very slow-paced, and it obtains a lot more water than it pulled out of the well. The tears God gives are now accompanied by joy; however, although they are experienced, there is no striving for them.
5. This water of great blessings and favors that the Lord gives here makes the virtues grow incomparably better than in the previous degree of prayer, for the soul is now ascending above its misery and receiving a little knowledge of the delights of glory. This water I believe makes the virtues grow better and also brings the soul much closer to the true Virtue, which is God, from whence come all the virtues. His Majesty is beginning to communicate Himself to this soul, and He wants it to experience how He is doing so.
In arriving here it begins soon to lose its craving for earthly things -- and little wonder! It sees clearly that one moment of the enjoyment of glory cannot be experienced here below, neither are there riches, or sovereignties, or honors, or delights that are able to provide a brief moment of that happiness, for it is a true happiness that, it is seen, satisfies us. In earthly things it would seem to me a marvel were we ever to understand just where we can find this satisfaction, for there is never lacking in these earthly things both the "yes" and the "no." During the time of this prayer, everything is "yes." The "no" comes afterward upon seeing that the delight is ended and that one cannot recover it -- nor does one know how. Were one to crush self with penances and prayer and all the rest, it would profit little if the Lord did not desire to give this delight. God in His greatness desires that this soul understand that He is so close it no longer needs to send Him messengers but can speak with Him itself and not by shouting since He is so near that when it merely moves its lips, He understands it.
6. It seems impertinent to say this since we know that God always understands us and is with us. There is no doubt about this understanding and presence. But our Emperor and Lord desires that in this prayer we know that He understands us, and what His presence does, and that He wants to begin to work in the soul in a special way. All of this that the Lord desires is manifest in the great interior and exterior satisfaction He gives the soul and in the difference there is, as I said, between this delight and happiness and the delights of earth, for this delight seems to fill the void that through our sins we have caused in the soul. This satisfaction takes place in its very intimate depths, and the soul doesn't know where the satisfaction comes from or how, nor frequently does it know what to do or what to desire or what to ask for. It seems it has found everything at once and doesn't know what it has found.
Nor do I know how to explain this experience because for so many things learning is necessary. Here it would be helpful to explain well the difference between a general and a particular grace -- for there are many who are ignorant of this difference -- and how the Lord desires that the soul in this prayer almost see with its own eyes, as they say, this particular grace. Learning is also required to explain many other things, which I perhaps did not express correctly. But since what I say is going to be checked by persons who will recognize any error, I'm not worrying about it. In matters of theology as well as in those of the spirit I know that I can be mistaken; yet, since this account will end in good hands, these learned men will understand and remove what is erroneous.
7. Still, I should like to explain this experience because we are dealing with beginners; and when the Lord begins to grant these favors, the soul itself doesn't understand them nor does it know what to do with itself. For if the Lord leads it along the path of fear, as He did me, it is a great trial if there is no one to understand it. To see itself described brings it intense joy, and then it sees clearly the path it is walking on. It is a great good to know what one must do in order to advance in any of these stages. For I have suffered much and have lost a great deal of time for not knowing what to do, and I pity souls greatly who find themselves alone when they arrive at this stage. Even though I have read many spiritual books and they touch upon the relevant points, the explanations are brief; and if the soul is not very experienced, even were the explanations ample, it would have a hard time understanding itself.
8. I desire very much that the Lord help me explain the effects caused in the soul by these things that are now beginning to be supernatural so that through the effects one may know when they are the work of God's spirit. I say "one may know," but I mean in conformity with what one can know here below. It is always good that we walk with fear and caution. For, although the work may be from God, the devil at times can transform himself into an angel of light; and if the soul has not a great deal of experience, it will not discern the devil's work -- and, in fact, it must have so much experience that it needs to come close to the very summit of prayer in order to have such discernment.
The little time at my disposal is little help to me and so His Majesty must come to my aid. I have to follow the community life and have many other duties since I am in a house which is just beginning, as will be seen afterward. As a result, I write without the time and calm for it, and bit by bit. I should like to have time, because when the Lord gives the spirit, things are put down with ease and in a much better way. Putting them down is then like copying a model you have before your eyes. But if the spirit is lacking, it is more difficult to speak about these things than to speak Arabic, as the saying goes, even though many years may have been spent in prayer. As a result, it seems to me most advantageous to have this experience while I am writing, because I see clearly that it is not I who say what I write; for neither do I plan it with the intellect nor do I know afterward how I managed to say it. This often happens to me.
9. Let us now return to our garden and see how these trees are beginning to bud so as to blossom and afterward give fruit -- and also the flowers and carnations so as to give forth their fragrance. This comparison has its charm for me because often in my beginnings (and, please the Lord, I may have now begun to serve His Majesty; I mean the beginnings of what I shall say from here on about my life) it was a great delight for me to consider my soul as a garden and reflect that the Lord was taking His walk in it. I begged Him to increase the fragrance of the little flowers of virtue that were beginning to bloom, so it seemed, and that they might give Him glory and He might sustain them since I desired nothing for myself -- and that He might cut the ones He wanted, for I already knew that better ones would flower. I say "cut" because there are times when the soul has no thought of this garden. Everything seems to be dry, and it seems there is not going to be any water to sustain it -- nor does it appear that there has ever been in the soul anything of virtue. It undergoes much tribulation because the Lord desires that it seem to the poor gardener that everything acquired in watering and keeping the garden up is being lost. This dryness amounts to an authentic weeding and pulling up of the remaining bad growth by its roots, no matter how small it may be. By knowing that there is no diligence that suffices if God takes away the water of grace and by placing little value on the nothing that we are, and even less than nothing, the soul gains much humility. The flowers begin to grow again.
10. O my Lord and my God! I cannot say this without tears and great joy of soul! How You desire, Lord, thus to be with us and to be present in the Sacrament (for in all truth this can be believed since it is so, and in the fullness of truth we can make this comparison); and if it were not for our fault, we could rejoice in being with You, and You would be glad to be with us since You say that Your delight is to be with the children of the earth. O my Lord! What is this? As often as I hear these words, they bring me great consolation; they did so when I was very far gone. Is it possible, Lord, that there be a soul that reaches the point where You bestow similar favors and gifts, and understands that You are to be with it, that goes back to offending You after so many favors and after such striking demonstrations of the love You have for it which cannot be doubted since the effects of it are obvious? Yes, there certainly is one, and not one who has done this once but done it many times -- for it is I. And may it please your goodness, Lord, that I might be the only ungrateful one and the only one who has done such terrible evil and shown such excessive ingratitude. But even from this evil, Your infinite goodness has drawn out something worthwhile; and the greater the evil, the more resplendent the wonder of Your mercies. And how many are the reasons I can sing Your mercies forever!
11. I beseech You, my God, that it may be so and that I may sing them without end since You have deigned to bestow upon me mercies so outstanding they amaze those who see them; and as for me, they frequently carry me out of myself to praise You the better. By remaining in myself without You, I could do nothing, my Lord, but return to cutting the garden flowers in such a way that this miserable ground would once more serve for a trash heap as it did previously. Do not permit it, Lord, or desire the loss of the soul You bought with so many labors and which You have so often gone back again to rescue and save from the teeth of the terrifying dragon.
12. May your Reverence pardon me, for I have gone off the subject; and don't be surprised, because in speaking about myself I am dealing with my feelings, and therefore it is often very difficult to resist continuing to proclaim the praises of God as I put down in writing the many things I owe Him. And I don't think these praises will cause displeasure to your Reverence, for we both, it seems to me, can sing the same thing even though in a different way -- because what I owe God is much more since He has pardoned me more, as your Reverence knows.
