CHAPTER 15
 
Continues on the same subject and gives some advice about how to act in this prayer of quiet. Discusses the fact that many souls reach this prayer but few pass beyond. Knowledge of the things touched on here is very necessary and beneficial.
 
1. Now let's return to the subject. This quietude and recollection is something that is clearly felt through the satisfaction and peace bestowed on the soul, along with great contentment and calm and a very gentle delight in the faculties. It seems to the soul, since it hasn't gone further, that there's nothing left to desire and that it should willingly say with St. Peter that it will make its dwelling there. It dares not move or stir, for it seems that good will slip through it hands -- nor would it even want to breathe sometimes. The poor little thing doesn't understand that since by its own efforts it can do nothing to draw that good to itself, so much less will it be able to keep it for longer than the Lord desires.
I have already mentioned that in this first recollection and quiet the soul's faculties do not cease functioning. But the soul is so satisfied with God that as long as the recollection lasts, the quiet and calm are not lost since the will is united with God even though the two faculties are distracted; in fact, little by little the will brings the intellect and the memory back to recollection. Because even though the will may not be totally absorbed, it is so well occupied, without knowing how, that no matter what efforts the other two faculties make, they cannot take away its contentment and joy. But rather with hardly any effort the will is gradually helped so that this little spark of love of God may not go out.
2. May it please His Majesty to give me grace to explain this state well because there are many, many souls who reach it but few that pass beyond; and I don't know whose fault it is. Most surely God does not fail, for once His Majesty has granted a soul the favor of reaching this stage, I don't believe He will fail to grant it many more favors unless through its own fault.
It is very important that the soul reaching this stage realize the great dignity of its state and the great favor the Lord has bestowed on it and how with good reason it must not belong to the earth because it now seems His goodness will make it a citizen of heaven, provided it doesn't stop through its own fault; and unhappy it will be if it turns back. I think turning back would mean falling to the bottom, as I was doing, if the mercy of the Lord hadn't rescued me. For the most part, in my opinion, this turning back will come through serious faults; nor is it possible to leave so much good without the blindness caused by much evil.
3. Thus, for the love of the Lord, I beg those whom His Majesty has so highly favored in the attainment of this state that they understand it and esteem it with a humble and holy confidence so as not to return to the fleshpots of Egypt. If through weakness and wickedness and a miserable nature they should fall, as I did, let them keep ever in mind the good they have lost and be suspicious and walk with the fear -- for they are right in doing so -- that if they don't return to prayer, they will go from bad to worse. What I call a true fall is abhorrence of the path by which one gained so much good; and to these souls I am speaking. For I am not saying that they should never offend God or fall into sin, although it would be right for anyone who has begun to receive these favors to be very much on guard against sinning; but we are miserable creatures. What I advise strongly is not to abandon prayer, for in prayer people will understand what they are doing and win repentance from the Lord and fortitude to lift themselves up. And you must believe that if you give up prayer, you are, in my opinion, courting danger. I don't know if I understand what I'm saying because, as I said, I'm judging by myself.
4. This prayer, then, is a little spark of the Lord's true love which He begins to enkindle in the soul; and He desires that the soul grow in the understanding of what this love accompanied by delight is. For anyone who has experience, it is impossible not to understand soon that this little spark cannot be acquired. Yet, this nature of ours is so eager for delights that it tries everything; but it is quickly left cold because however much it may desire to light the fire and obtain this delight, it doesn't seem to be doing anything else than throwing water on it and killing it. If this quietude and recollection and little spark is from God's spirit and not a delight given by the devil or procured by ourselves, it will be noticed no matter how small it is. And if we don't extinguish it through our own fault, it is what will begin to enkindle the large fire that (as I shall mention in its place) throws forth flames of the greatest love of God which His Majesty gives to perfect souls.
5. This little spark is the sign or the pledge God gives to this soul that He now chooses it for great things if it will prepare itself to receive them. This spark is a great gift, much more so than I can express.
As I say, I know many souls that reach this stage, but to me it is a terrible pity that those that pass beyond, as they should, are so few I am ashamed to mention it. I do not mean there are few; there must be many, for there must be some reason why God allows us to live. I am speaking from what I have seen. I should very much like to advise these souls to be careful not to hide the talent since it seems God desires to choose them to bring profit to many others, especially in these times when staunch friends of God are necessary to sustain the weak. And those who are aware of this favor within themselves may consider that they are such friends if they know how to respond according to the laws that even a good friendship in the world demands; otherwise, as I said, they should be fearful lest they bring evil upon themselves -- and please God it would then fall only upon themselves!
6. What the soul must do during these times of quiet amounts to no more than proceeding gently and noiselessly. What I call noise is running about with the intellect looking for many words and reflections so as to give thanks for this gift and piling up one's sins and faults in order to see that the gift is unmerited. Everything is motion here; the intellect is representing, and the memory hurrying about. For certainly these faculties tire me out from time to time; and although I have a poor memory, I cannot subdue it. The will calmly and wisely must understand that one does not deal well with God by force and that our efforts are like the careless use of large pieces of wood which smother this little spark. One should realize this and humbly say: "Lord, what am I capable of here? What has the servant to do with the Lord -- or earth with heaven?" Or other words that at this time come to mind out of love and well grounded in the knowledge that what is said is the truth. And one should pay no attention to the intellect, for it is a grinding mill. The will may desire to share what it enjoys or may work to recollect the intellect, for often it will find itself in this union and calm while the intellect wanders about aimlessly. It is better that the will leave the intellect alone than go after it, and that it remain like a wise bee in the recollection and in enjoyment of that gift. For if no bee were to enter the beehive and each were employed in going after the other, no honey could be made.
7. As a result, the soul will lose a great deal if it isn't careful in this matter, especially if the intellect is keen. For when the soul begins to compose speeches and search for ideas, though insignificant, it will think it is doing something if they are well expressed. The idea it should have here is a clear understanding that there isn't any idea that will make God give us so great a favor but that this favor comes only from His goodness; and it should be aware that we are very near His Majesty and ask for His gifts and pray for the Church and for those who have asked for our prayers and for the souls in purgatory, not with the noise of words but with longing that He hear us. This is a kind of prayer that includes many things and in which more is obtained than through a great deal of reflection by the intellect. Let the will awaken within itself some spontaneous considerations verifying its progress so as to quicken this love, and let it make some loving acts about what it will do for one to whom it owes so much without, as I said, admitting noise from the intellect which goes about looking for great concepts. In fact, a little straw put there with humility -- and it will be less than a straw if we put it on ourselves -- will serve the purpose and help more to enkindle the fire than a lot of wood along with much learned reasoning. These, in our opinion, would smother the spark within the space of a Creed.
This advice is good for the learned men who ordered me to write. For, through the goodness of God, all may reach this prayer; and it may happen that these learned men will pass the time in making scriptural applications. Although their studies will not cease to benefit them a lot before and afterward, here during these periods of prayer there is little need for learning, in my opinion; rather, their studies will make the will tepid. For in seeing itself near the light, the intellect then has the greatest clarity; and I, though being what I am, seem to be another person.
8. And, in fact, it has happened to me that while in this quietude, and understanding hardly anything of the Latin prayers, especially of the psalter, I have not only understood how to render the Latin verse in the vernacular but have gone beyond to rejoicing in the meaning of the verse.
I am not speaking of those who have to preach or teach, for in that case it is good to take advantage of those studies so as to aid the poor ones who, like myself, have little knowledge. Charity in helping souls is always a great thing, provided this help is given for God alone.
Therefore, in these times of quietude, let the soul remain in its repose; let them put their learning to one side. The time will come when it will be useful for the Lord; they should esteem it so that they do not desire to abandon it for any treasure but to use it only to serve His Majesty, for it is very helpful. Believe me, in the presence of infinite Wisdom, a little study of humility and one act of humility is worth more than all the knowledge of the world. Here there is no demand for reasoning but for knowing what as a matter of fact we are and for placing ourselves (with simplicity) in God's presence, for He desires the soul to become ignorant in His presence, as indeed it is. His Majesty humbles Himself so much that He allows us to be near Him in spite of what we are.
9. The intellect is also stirred to compose prayers of thanksgiving; but the will, calmly, without daring to raise its eyes, like the publican, gives better thanks than the intellect can perhaps express with all its rhetorical artifices. Finally, at this stage one doesn't have to renounce completely discursive mental prayer or the use of some words, or even vocal prayers if there should be the desire or ability; if the quiet is great, it is difficult to speak without a good deal of effort.
We can discern, in my opinion, whether this quiet comes from the spirit of God or whether we procure it ourselves once God begins to give devotion and we, as I said, want to pass on to the quiet through our own efforts. When we procure the quiet ourselves, it produces no effect, quickly goes away, and leaves behind aridity.
10. If the quiet is from the devil, I think an experienced soul will recognize this because it results in disturbance and a lack of humility and of preparation for the effects which the prayer coming from God produces. It doesn't leave light in the intellect or constancy in truth. The devil can do little harm or none at all if the soul directs to God the delight and sweetness it feels and fixes its thoughts and desires upon Him, as was advised. The devil can't gain anything; rather, God will permit that the devil, by means of the very delight he causes in the soul, will lose much. For this delight will prompt the soul -- since it thinks God gives the delight -- to return often to prayer with longing for the Lord. And if it is a humble soul and not inquisitive or concerned about delights, even though they be spiritual, but a friend of the cross, it will pay little attention to the consolation given by the devil. It will be unable to pay little attention to the consolation coming from the spirit of God but will highly esteem it. But anything the devil gives is like himself; a total lie. When the devil sees that in this consolation and delight the soul humbles itself (for in this experience it must have much humility, as in all matters of prayer and consolation it must strive to come away humble), he will not return often, because he sees his loss.
11. For this reason and many others, I counseled in dealing with the first mode of prayer, the first water, that it is an important matter for beginners in prayer to start off by becoming detached from every kind of satisfaction and to enter the path solely with the determination to help Christ carry the cross like good cavaliers, who desire to serve their king at no salary since their salary is certain. We should fix our eyes on the true and everlasting kingdom which we are trying to gain. It is very important to keep this kingdom always in mind, especially in the beginning. For afterward it is seen so clearly that rather than striving to keep remembering the short time everything lasts and how everything is nothing and how rest should be considered no more than a trifle, it is necessary to forget these things in order to live.
12. It seems this is a very poor way of thinking -- and so it is. For those who are advanced in perfection would consider it an affront and would be ashamed if they thought they should give up the good things of this world because these things will come to an end; even if these things were to last forever, advanced souls would be happy to renounce them for God. And the more perfect these souls are, the happier they would be; and the longer the things last, still happier would they be. For here in these souls love has now increased, and it is love that is at work. But for beginners this advice is most important, and they should not hold it in little esteem, for what is obtained is a great good -- and that is why I give this advice so strongly. This advice will even be necessary sometimes for those who have reached a very exalted prayer when God desires to try them and when it seems that His Majesty is abandoning them. As I already said, and I wouldn't want this to be forgotten, in this life the soul doesn't grow like the body, even though we say it grows -- and in fact it does. After a child grows up and develops a strong body and becomes an adult, the body doesn't dwindle and grow small again. But in the case of the soul, the Lord desires this to happen, according to what I have seen for myself; for otherwise I wouldn't know. The purpose must be to humiliate us for our own great good and so that we might not become careless while in this exile, since the one who goes highest must fear the most and trust the less in self. There comes times when it is necessary for these souls to protect themselves from offending God. Their wills are so fixed in His that rather than commit an imperfection, they would allow themselves to be tormented and would suffer a thousand deaths. But since they are attacked by temptations and persecutions, it becomes necessary, in order to avoid sin, to make use of prayer's first weapons and return to the thought that everything will end and that there is a heaven and a hell and other things of this sort.
13. Well, returning to what I was saying, a solid foundation for the protection of oneself from the tricks and consolations coming from the devil is to begin with the determination to follow the way of the cross and not desire consolations, since the Lord Himself pointed out this way of perfection saying: take up your cross and follow me. He is our model; whoever follows His counsels solely for the sake of pleasing Him has nothing to fear.
14. In the progress they observe in themselves they will know that the devil is not the cause if, even though they fall again, there remains a sign that the Lord was present in their prayer: and it is that they rise again quickly. There are other signs as well which I shall now mention. When the prayer comes from God's spirit, there is no need to go dredging up things in order to derive some humility and shame because the Lord Himself gives this prayer in a manner very different from that which we gain through our nice little reasonings. For such humility is nothing in comparison with the true humility the Lord with His light here teaches and which causes an embarrassment that undoes one. It is well known that God gives a knowledge that makes us realize we have no good of ourselves; and the greater the favors, the greater is this knowledge. He bestows a strong desire to advance in prayer and not abandon it no matter what trial may come upon one. The soul offers itself up in all things. It feels sure, while still being humble and fearing, that it will be saved. He casts out from it all servile fear and grants a more mature trusting fear. It is aware of the beginning of a love of God that has much less self-interest. It desires periods of solitude in order to enjoy that good more.
15. In sum, so as not to tire myself, this prayer of quiet is the beginning of all blessings. The flowers are already at the point in which hardly anything is lacking for them to bud; and the soul sees this very clearly. In no way is it able to believe at that time that God is not with it. When it sees again the cracks and imperfections in itself, it then fears everything. And it is good that it is fearful, although there are some souls that profit more by believing that this prayer comes certainly from God than by all the fears possible. For if by nature someone is loving and grateful, the memory of the favor God has granted does more to bring such a person back to God than all the infernal punishments imaginable. At least this happened in my case, even though I am so wretched.
16. Because the signs of the good spirit will be mentioned as I go along and it is so difficult for me to explain them well, I won't speak of them now. I believe that with the help of God I shall in this way somehow succeed. Apart from my experience in which I have understood a great deal, I know about these from some very learned men and very holy persons who are worthy of belief. And when souls reach this stage, through the goodness of God, may they not go about as wearied as I did.

CHAPTER 16
 
Treats of the third degree of prayer. Explains sublime matters and what the soul that reaches this stage can do and the effects produced by these great favors of the Lord. This prayer lifts the soul up in the praises of God and brings wonderful consolation to whoever reaches this stage.
 
1. Let us come now to speak of the third water by which this garden is irrigated, that is, the water flowing from a river or spring. By this means the garden is irrigated with much less labor, although some labor is required to direct the flow of the water. The Lord so desires to help the gardener here that He Himself becomes practically the gardener and the one who does everything.
This prayer is a sleep of the faculties: the faculties neither fail entirely to function nor understand how they function. The consolation, the sweetness, and the delight are incomparably greater than that experienced in the previous prayer. The water of grace rises up to the throat of this soul since such a soul can no longer move forward; nor does it know how; nor can it move backward. It would desire to enjoy the greatest glory. It is like a person who is already holding the candle and for whom little is left before dying the death that is desired: such a one rejoices in that agony with the greatest delight describable. This experience doesn't seem to me to be anything else than an almost complete death to all earthly things and an enjoyment of God.
I don't know any other terms for describing it or how to explain it. Nor does the soul then know what to do because it doesn't know whether to speak or to be silent, whether to laugh or to weep. This prayer is a glorious foolishness, a heavenly madness where the true wisdom is learned; and it is for the soul a most delightful way of enjoying.
2. In fact five or even six years ago the Lord often gave me this prayer in abundance, and I didn't understand it; nor did I know how to speak of it. Thus it was my intention, at this point, to say very little or nothing at all. I did understand clearly that it was not a complete union of all the faculties and that this type of prayer was more excellent than the previous one. But I confess that I couldn't discern or understand where the difference lay. I believe that on account of the humility your Reverence has shown in desiring to be helped by as simple-minded a person as myself, the Lord today after Communion granted me this prayer; and interrupting my thanksgiving, He put before me these comparisons, taught me the manner of explaining it, and what the soul must do here. Certainly I was startled and I understood at once. Often I had been as though bewildered and inebriated in this love, and never was I able to understand its nature. I understood clearly that it was God's work, but I couldn't understand how He was working in this stage. For the truth of the matter is that the faculties are almost totally united with God but not so absorbed as not to function. I am extremely pleased that I now understand it. Blessed be the Lord who so favored me!
3. The faculties have only the ability to be occupied completely with God. It doesn't seem that any one of them dares to move nor can we make them stir unless we strain to distract ourselves; but even then I don't think we could do so entirely. One utters many words here in praise of God without thinking them up, unless it is the Lord who thinks them up; at least the intellect is worth nothing here. The soul would desire to cry out praises, and it is beside itself -- a delightful disquiet. Now the flowers are blossoming; they are beginning to spread their fragrance. The soul would desire here that everyone could see and understand its glory so as to praise God and that they would all help it to praise Him and share in its joy since it cannot bear so much joy. I think it is like what is said in the Gospels about the woman that wanted to call or did call in her neighbors. This joy it seems to me must have been what was felt in the admirable spirit of the royal prophet David when he played on the harp and sang the praises of God. I'm very devoted to this glorious king, and I would desire all to be so, especially those of us who are sinners.
4. Oh, help me God! What is the soul like when it is in this state! It would want to be all tongues so as to praise the Lord. It speaks folly in a thousand holy ways, ever trying to find means of pleasing the one who thus possesses it. I know a person who though not a poet suddenly composed some deeply-felt verses well expressing her pain. They were not composed by the use of her intellect; rather, in order that she enjoy the glory so delightful a distress gave to her, she complained of it in this way to God. She desired all her body and soul to break in pieces to demonstrate the joy she felt in this pain. What torments can then be offered her that will not give her delight when she suffers them for her Lord? I see clearly that the martyrs did nothing of themselves in suffering torments, for the soul well knows that fortitude comes from another. But what will it feel in returning to its senses so as to live in the world and in having to return to the world's cares and formalities?
Well, it doesn't seem to me that I have exaggerated. Nothing can compare with the delight the Lord desires a soul to enjoy in this exile. May You be blessed forever, Lord! May all things praise You forever! Since while I write this I am not freed from such holy, heavenly madness coming from Your goodness and mercy -- for You grant this favor without any merits on my part at all -- either desire, my King, I beseech You, that all to whom I speak become mad from Your love, or do not permit that I speak to anyone! Either ordain, Lord, that I no longer pay attention to anything in the world, or take me out of it! No longer my God, can this servant of Yours suffer the many trials that come from seeing herself without You since if she must live, she desires no rest -- nor should You give it to her! This soul would now want to see itself free -- eating kills it; sleeping distresses it. It observes that its lifetime is passing in pleasure and that nothing other than You can give it pleasure any longer; for since it desires to live no longer in itself but in You, it seems that its life is unnatural.
5. O true Lord and my Glory! How delicate and extremely heavy a cross You have prepared for those who reach this state! "Delicate" because it is pleasing; "heavy" because there come times when there is no capacity to bear it; and yet the soul would never want to be freed from it unless it were for the sake of being with You. When it recalls that it hasn't served You in anything and that by living it can serve You, it would want to carry a much heavier cross and never die until the end of the world. It finds no rest in anything except in doing You some small service. It doesn't know what it wants, but it well understands that it wants nothing other than You.
6. O my son! (The one to whom this is addressed and who ordered me to write this is so humble that he wants to be so called). Let some of these things which your Reverence sees that I go to excess in be for you alone. There is no reason sufficient to prevent me from this excess when the Lord carries me out of myself -- nor since this morning when I received Communion do I think it is I who am speaking. It seems that what I see is a dream, and I would desire to see no other persons than those who are sick with this sickness I now have. I beg your Reverence that we may all be mad for love of Him who for love of us was called mad. Since your Reverence says that you love me, prove it to me by preparing yourself so that God may grant you this favor; I see very few who do not have much more discretion than is necessary for their spiritual progress. It could well be that I am the one who abounds in this more than all others. Don't allow this to happen to me, my Father (since you are also like a son), for you are my confessor and the one to whom I have entrusted my soul. Disillusion me with truth since these truths are seldom made use of.
7. I should like the five of us who at present love each other in Christ to make a kind of pact that since others in these times gather together in secret against His Majesty to prepare wicked deeds and heresies, we might seek to gather together some time to free each other from illusion and to speak about how we might mend our ways and please God more since we do not know ourselves as well as others who observe us if they do so with love and concern for our progress. I say we should gather in secret because this kind of talk is no longer in fashion. Even preachers are composing their sermons so as not to displease. They may have good intentions, and the good deeds may follow; but the result is that few try to amend! But why don't sermons influence many to give up public vice? Do you know my opinion? Those who preach are very cautious; they don't have the great fire of love of God that the Apostles did, and so the flame has little power to enkindle. I don't say the fire should be as intense as that of the Apostles, but would that it were greater than what I see. Does your Reverence know what ought to be stressed? That souls abhor their lives and hold their reputations in little esteem, that -- providing they tell the truth and uphold it for the glory of God -- they pay little attention to whether or not they lose or gain all. Those who in fact risk all for God will find that they have both lost all and gained all. I don't say that I'm like this, but I wish I were.
8. Oh what great freedom to consider it a captivity to have to live and behave in conformity with the laws of the world! Since this freedom is obtained from the Lord, there are no slaves who would not risk all in order to be redeemed and return to their country. Since this is the true way, there is no reason to stop in the middle; otherwise we will never completely gain so great a treasure until life is finished. May the Lord grant us the favor of obtaining it.
Tear up what I have just said, if your Reverence thinks you should, as though it were a private letter to you, and pardon me for I have been very bold.

CHAPTER 17
 
Continues with the same subject, the explanation of this third degree of prayer. Concludes the discussion of its effects. Speaks of the harm caused here by the imagination and memory.
 
1. A reasonable account has been given of this kind of prayer and of what the soul must do, or better, what God does in it, for it is He who now takes on the task of gardener and wants it to rest. The will only gives its consent to these favors it enjoys; and it should offer itself to all that the true Wisdom desires to do in it because courage is certainly necessary. For the joy is so great that it sometimes seems the soul is at the very point of going forth from the body. And what a happy death that would be!
2. Here I think it is advisable, as I told your Reverence, to abandon oneself completely into the hands of God: if He wants to bring the soul to heaven, it goes, if to hell, it feels no grief since it goes with its God; if its life comes to an end, this it desires; if it lives a thousand years, this too it desires. Let His Majesty treat it as His own -- the soul no longer belongs to itself. It is given over entirely to the Lord -- it completely overlooks itself. I say that when God gives the soul so lofty a prayer, it can do all of this and much more since these are its effects. And it understands that it does so without tiring the intellect. I only think it is amazed at seeing how good a gardener the Lord is and how He doesn't desire it to do any of the work other than delight in the fragrance the flowers are beginning to give. For in one of these visits, however brief, the water is given without measure because the gardener is who He is -- in truth, the creator of the water. And what the poor soul could not achieve in about twenty years with its labors to bring repose to the intellect, this heavenly gardener accomplishes in a moment. And the fruit grows and matures in such a way that the soul can be sustained from its garden if the Lord so desires. But He doesn't give it permission to distribute fruit until it is very strong from what it has eaten; otherwise it will be giving it to others to taste without their receiving any profit or gain, maintaining them and giving them to eat at its own cost; and perhaps it will itself be left dead from hunger. This possibility has been explained well for those who are learned men, and they will know how to make the application better than I know how to explain it through my own efforts.
3. In sum, the virtues are now stronger than in the previous prayer of quiet. The soul can't ignore them, because it seems that it is different and doesn't know how this happened. It begins to perform great deeds by means of the fragrance the flowers give, for the Lord desires that they bloom so that it may see that it possesses virtue although it is very clearly aware that it couldn't have acquired them -- nor was it able to -- in many years, and also that in that moment the heavenly gardener gave them. Here the humility that remains in the soul is much greater and more profound than in the past. The soul sees more clearly that it did neither little nor much other than consent to the Lord's favors and embrace them with its will.
It seems to me this kind of prayer is a very apparent union of the whole soul with God. But seemingly His Majesty desires to give leeway to the faculties so that they may understand and rejoice in the many things He is accomplishing here.
4. In order that your Reverence may see what can happen and understand when it does happen to you -- at least I was confused for a while, and that's why I'm speaking of it here -- let me say that it sometimes, or very often, comes about that while the will is united, the soul sees clearly and understands that the will is held fast and is rejoicing. I say "it sees clearly," and that the will alone is in deep quiet; and the intellect and the memory, on the other hand, are so free that they can tend to business affairs and engage in works of charity.
Although this prayer seems entirely the same as the prayer of quiet I mentioned, it is different -- partly because in the prayer of quiet the soul didn't desire to move or stir, rejoicing in that holy idleness of Mary; and in this prayer it can also be Martha in such a way that it is as though engaged in both the active and contemplative life together. It tends to works of charity and to business affairs that have to do with its state of life and to reading; although it isn't master of itself completely. And it understands clearly that the best part of the soul is somewhere else. It's as though we were speaking to someone at our side and from the other side another person were speaking to us; we wouldn't be fully attentive to either the one or the other. This prayer is something that is felt very clearly, and it gives deep satisfaction and happiness when it is experienced. It is an excellent preparation so that the soul may reach a profound quiet when it has time for solitude, or leisure from business matters. It causes the soul to go about like people whose appetite is satisfied and who have no need to eat but feel that they have taken enough so that they wouldn't desire just any kind of food; yet they are not so filled that they wouldn't eagerly eat some if it were tempting to the appetite. The soul is therefore neither content with nor desirous of the world's satisfactions, because it has in itself what pleases it more; greater consolations from God -- desires to satisfy its desire to enjoy Him more and to be with Him. Being with Him is what it wants.
5. There is another kind of union, which, although it is not a complete union, is greater than the union just mentioned but not as great as that which was mentioned in reference to this third water.
Since the Lord may give them all to you if you have not already received them, your Reverence will be pleased to find them written down and will understand what they are. For it is one grace to receive the Lord's favor; another, to understand which favor and grace it is; and a third, to know how to describe and explain it. And although no more than the first grace seems necessary, it is a great advantage and a gift for the soul that it also understand the favor so as not to go about confused and afraid -- and so that it may become more courageous in following the path of the Lord, trampling under its feet all worldly things. Each one of these graces is a reason for those who receive it to praise the Lord greatly and, also, for those who may not receive it to praise Him because His Majesty gave it to one of the living so that that person might help the rest of us.
Well, now, this kind of union I wish to explain often happens -- especially to me since God frequently gives me this kind of favor. For God takes to Himself the will and even the intellect, it seems to me, so that it might not engage in discourse but be occupied with rejoicing in Him like those who are contemplating and who see so much that they don't know where to fix their gaze -- looking now here, now there, without being able to perceive clearly any one thing. The memory remains free, but it seems to be joined with the imagination. And since it sees itself alone, the war it wages is something to behold -- how it strives to disturb everything. As for me, I find the memory tiresome and abhorrent; and I often beseech the Lord that He take it away during these periods if it is going to bother me so much. Sometimes I say to Him: "When, my God, will my soul be completely joined together in Your praise and not broken in pieces, unable to make use of itself?" Here I see the evil that sin causes in us since it so holds us in its power that we cannot do what we desire to do in order to be always occupied in God.
6. I say it sometimes happens to me -- and today was one of these times, so I remember it vividly -- that I see my soul become undone in the desire to be united there where the greater part is, and this is impossible; rather the imagination and memory carry on such a war that the soul is left powerless. Since the other faculties have ceased to function, these two are of no avail, not even for doing harm. They do a great deal though by their disturbance. I say "not even for doing harm" because they do not have the strength nor can they concentrate on one thing. Since the intellect gives them neither much nor little assistance in what they represent to it; they don't rest in anything but flit from one thing to the other; they are like little moths at night, bothersome and annoying: so they go from one extreme to the other. This comparison, I think, gets to the point because they don't have the strength to do any harm -- they are an annoyance to those who see them.
I don't know what remedy there is for this since until now God hasn't made one known to me. I would be glad to find out one, for, as I say, the imagination and memory often torment me. Both our great misery and, very clearly, the tremendous power of God are manifested here. For the faculties that run loose weary and harm us so much; and those that are with His Majesty give us repose.
7. The only remedy I have found, after having tired myself out for many years, is the one I mentioned in speaking of the prayer of quiet: to pay no more attention to the memory than one would to a madman -- leave it go its way, for only God can stop it and, in truth, here it remains as a slave. We must suffer it with patience as Jacob did Leah, for the Lord does us a great favor in allowing us to enjoy Rachel. I say "it remains as a slave" because in fact the memory is unable -- no matter what it does -- to gather to itself the other faculties; rather, without any labor, they often make the memory come to them. Sometimes God is pleased to take pity when seeing the memory so lost and disturbed and desirous of being with the others, and His Majesty consents to its being burnt in the fire of that divine candle where the others are already reduced to dust since they have lost their natural being and are almost supernatural in their enjoyment of such great blessings.
8. In all these ways in which this last water comes from the spring I mentioned, the glory and repose of the soul is so great that the body very perceivably shares in that joy and delight; it does so "very perceivably," and the virtues are as advanced as I have mentioned.
It seems that the Lord has desired to explain as much of these states in which the soul finds itself as can be understood here below. Your Reverence can discuss this explanation with a spiritual person who has experienced these states and who is also learned. If he should say that the explanation is all right, believe that it was given by God and thank His Majesty very much for it. Because, as I have said, with the passing of time individuals will be very glad to understand what it is; even though they are given the grace to enjoy it, they aren't given the grace to understand it. If His Majesty has given you the grace to enjoy this prayer, you will through your intelligence and learning understand what is said here. May He be praised for everything throughout all ages, amen.
