CHAPTER 21
 
Continues and concludes the discussions of this last degree of prayer. Tells about what the soul that experiences this prayer feels upon returning to life in the world and about the light the Lord gives it concerning the world's illusions. It contains good doctrine.
 
1. To finish now what I was discussing, I say that there is no need here for the consent of this soul. It has already given itself to God, and it knows that it has willingly surrendered itself into His hands and that it cannot deceive Him, because He is aware of all things. Matters aren't as they are here on earth, for all of earthly life is filled with deception and duplicity: when you think you have won a friend, according to what is shown you, you afterward come to understand that that was all a lie. It isn't possible anymore to live in the midst of such intrigue, especially present where there is something to be gained.
Blessed is the soul the Lord brings to the understanding of truth! Oh, how fit a state this is for kings! How much more worthwhile it would be for them to strive for this stage of prayer rather than for great dominion! What righteousness there would be in the kingdom! What evils they would avoid and have avoided! In this stage one does not fear to lose one's life or honor for the love of God! What a great blessing this is for anyone who has a greater obligation to look after the honor of God than do all those who are subordinate, since these latter must follow their kings! For one fraction of an increase in faith and for having given some light to the heretics such a king would be willing to lose a thousand kingdoms -- and rightly so; for the gain would be far greater: a kingdom without an end, which when the soul tastes only one drop of its water, makes everything here below seem repulsive. How much more if the soul be immersed in this water?
2. O Lord! Were You to give me the office by which I could shout this aloud, they would not believe me, as they do not believe many who know how to say this better than I; but at least it would be satisfying to me. It seems to me I would have held my life in little account in order to make known only one of these truths; I don't know what I might have done afterward, for I am not trustworthy. In spite of what I am, I experience great consuming impulses to tell these truths to those who are rulers. When I can do no more, I turn to You, my Lord, to beg of You a remedy for all. And You know well that I would very willingly dispossess myself of the favors You have granted me and give them to the kings, providing I could remain in a state in which I do not offend You; because I know that it would then be impossible for them to consent to the things that are now consented to, nor would these favors fail to bring the greatest blessings.
3. O my God! Give kings an understanding of their obligations. For You have desired to point these kings out on earth in such a way that I have even heard it said that there are signs in heaven when You take one away. Indeed, at the thought of this my devotion increases, that You, my King, desire that even by such happenings they realize that they must be imitators of You in life since at their death there is a sign in heaven, as when You died.
4. I am becoming very bold. Tear this up if it sounds bad to your Reverence and believe me that I would say it better in person if I could, or if I thought they would believe me, for I very earnestly commend them to God and would like to be of some help. Everything makes the soul risk its life; I frequently desire to be without life, and the risk to gain much costs but little. There is no one now living who sees directly the great illusion in which we walk and the blindness we suffer.
5. Once the soul has reached this stage, what it possesses for God is not only desires; His Majesty gives it the strength to put these desires into practice. There is nothing that comes to mind that it thinks would be of service to Him that it wouldn't venture to do; and the cost to it is nothing, because, as I say, it sees clearly that everything other than pleasing God is nothing. The trouble is that for persons as useless as myself there are few opportunities to do something. May You be pleased, my God, that there come a time in which I may be able to repay You even one mite of all I owe You. Ordain, Lord, as You wish, how this servant of Yours may in some manner serve You. Others were women, and they have done heroic things for love of You. I'm not good for anything but talk, and so You don't desire, my God, to put me to work; everything adds up to just words and desires about how much I must serve, and even in this I don't have freedom, because I might perhaps fail in everything. Fortify my soul and dispose it first, Good of all goods and my Jesus, and then ordain ways in which I might do something for You, for there is no longer anyone who can suffer to receive so much and not repay anything. Cost what it may, Lord, do not desire that I come into Your presence with hands so empty, since the reward must be given in conformity with one's deeds. Here is my life, here is my honor and my will. I have given all to You, I am Yours, make use of me according to Your will. I see clearly, Lord, the little I'm capable of. But having reached You, having climbed to this watchtower, I see truths. I can do all things, providing You do not leave me. Were You to leave, for however short a time, I would return to where I was, which was in hell.
6. Oh, how painful it is for a soul who finds itself in this stage to have to return to dealing with everything, to behold and see the farce of this so poorly harmonized life, to waste time in taking care of bodily needs, sleeping, and eating! Everything wearies it; it doesn't know how to flee; it sees itself captured and in chains. Then it feels more truly the misery of life and the captivity we endure because of our bodies. It knows the reason St. Paul had for beseeching God to be liberated from the body; it cries out with him; it begs God for freedom, as I have mentioned at other times. But in this state the impulse is often so great that it seems the soul wants to leave the body and go in search of this freedom since there is no one else who will free it. It goes about as one sold into a foreign land, and what wearies it most is that it doesn't find many who will complain with it and beg for this freedom; rather, what is more common is the desire to live. Oh, if only we were not bound to anything, if our satisfaction were not derived from any earthly thing, how the pain experienced from always living without Him and the desire to enjoy the true life would temper the fear of death!
7. If someone like myself, to whom the Lord has given this light (in spite of such lukewarm charity and such uncertainly about true rest on account of my not having merited it through my deeds), often feels so strongly the fact of my exile, I at times wonder what the feeling of the saints must have been. What must St. Paul and the Magdalene and others like them have undergone, in whom this fire of the love of God had grown so intense? It must have been a continual martyrdom.
It seems to me that those who bring me some relief, and in whose company I find rest, are persons who I find have themselves these desires -- I mean desires accompanied by works. I say accompanied by works because there are some persons who, in their own opinion, are detached; so they publish the fact. And the fact of their detachment should be true since their state demands it as well as the many years that have passed since some of them have set out on the way of perfection. But this soul recognizes well, from far off, those who have only a lot of words and those who have confirmed their words with works. It understands the small amount of good that the former do and the great amount that the latter do -- and this is something that anyone who has experience sees very clearly.
8. I have already mentioned these effects that the raptures that are from God's Spirit cause; the truth is that these effects are greater or less. I say less, because in the beginning, even though the rapture causes these effects, they are not proven with deeds; thus it cannot be determined whether they are present. The raptures also make perfection grow, and they take away every trace of a cobweb -- and this requires time. The more that love and humility grow, the greater the fragrance these flowers of virtues give off, both for oneself and for others. It is true that in one of these raptures the Lord can work in the soul in such a way that only a little labor is still required in order that it reach perfection, for no one who doesn't have this experience will be able to believe what the Lord gives the soul in this stage. In my opinion no effort of ours brings us to this perfection. I don't deny that someone with the help of God, making use of the means mentioned by authors who have written about prayer, its principles, and properties, will by means of many efforts reach perfection and great detachment. But they will not do so in as short a time as it takes for the Lord to accomplish it in this stage, without anything done on our part. He definitely draws the soul up from the earth and gives it dominion over every earthly thing, even though there may be no more merits in it than there were in me -- and I cannot overstress this absence of merit in me, because I had hardly any.
9. Why His Majesty does this is because He wants to, and He does it in the way He wants to; and even though the soul may not be ready, His Majesty prepares it to receive the good He gives it. Wherefore he doesn't always give raptures because souls have merited them through good cultivation of the garden (although it is very certain that anyone who does take good care of the garden and strives to be detached will not fail to be favored), but sometimes it is His will to show His greatness on very wretched soil, as I have said. He so prepares the soul for every good that it seems it is no longer capable, after a fashion, of turning back to its former life of offending God. Its thought becomes so accustomed to understanding what the real truth is that everything else seems to it to be child's play. It sometimes laughs to itself when it sees seriously religious and prayerful persons making a big issue out of some rules of etiquette which it has already trampled under foot. They claim that this is a matter of discretion and of the prestige accompanying their office so that they might bring about more good. The soul knows very well that they would bring about more good in one day than they would in ten years if for the love of God they thought a lot less of the prestige of their office.
10. Thus it lives a laborious life and always with the cross, but it continues to grow rapidly. When it is observed by its companions it seems to be at the summit. Within a short while it is much improved because God always goes on favoring it more. It is His soul; it is He who has taken it into His charge, and thus He illumines it. For it seems that by His assistance, He is ever guarding it from offending Him and favoring it and awakening it to His service.
When my soul reached this stage where God granted it such a great favor, the evil in me disappeared, and the Lord gave me strength to break away from it. It didn't bother me to be amid the occasions of falling and with people who formerly distracted me any more than if there were no occasions at all; what used to do me harm was helping me. All things were a means for my knowing and loving God more, for seeing what I owed Him, and for regretting what I had been.
11. I understood well that these effects didn't come from me, nor did I gain them through my diligence, for there wasn't even time for that. His Majesty solely out of His goodness had given me fortitude for them.
From the time the Lord began to grant me the favor of these raptures up until now, this fortitude has always been increasing; and in His goodness He has held me by His hand so that I might not turn back. Nor does it seem to me that I do hardly anything on my part -- and that is true; I understand clearly that it is the Lord who does everything. Hence it seems to me that souls upon whom the Lord bestows these favors and who receive them with humility and fear -- always understanding that it is the Lord Himself who grants them and that we ourselves do almost nothing -- could be placed in the company of any kind of people. Even if these people are distracted and corrupt, the soul will not be disturbed or enticed in anything; on the contrary, this experience will help it and serve as a means to greater progress. These are now strong souls the Lord chooses to benefit others, even though their fortitude doesn't come from themselves. Little by little, as the soul approaches the Lord in this stage, He communicates to it very deep secrets.
12. Here in this ecstasy are received the true revelations and the great favors and visions -- and all serve to humiliate and strengthen the soul, to lessen its esteem for the things of this life, and to make it know more clearly the grandeurs of the reward the Lord has prepared for those who serve Him.
May it please His Majesty that the extraordinary generosity He has shown this miserable sinner serve to encourage and rouse those who read this to abandon completely everything for God. If His Majesty repays so fully that even in this life the reward and gain possessed by those who serve Him is clearly seen, what will this reward be in the next life?

CHAPTER 22
 
Treats of how safe a path it is for contemplatives not to raise the spirit to high things unless the Lord raises it and of how the humanity of Christ must be the means to the most sublime contemplation. Tells about a mistaken theory she once tried to follow. This chapter is very beneficial.
 
1. There is one thing I want to say that in my opinion is important. If your Reverence thinks it is good, it can be used for giving advice since it could happen that you will have need of it. In some books written on prayer it is said that even though the soul cannot reach this state of prayer by itself, since the work is an entirely supernatural one that the Lord effects in the soul, it will be able to help itself by lifting the spirit above all creatures and humbly raising it up, and that the soul can do this after having passed many years in the purgative life while it is advancing in the illuminative. (I don't really know why they say illuminative; I understand it to refer to those who are advancing). They give strong advice to rid oneself of all corporeal images and to approach contemplation of the Divinity. They say that in the case of those who are advancing, these corporeal images, even when referring to the humanity of Christ, are an obstacle or impediment to the most perfect contemplation. In support of this theory they quote what the Lord said to the Apostles about the coming of the Holy Spirit -- I mean at the time of His Ascension. They think that since this work is entirely spiritual, any corporeal thing can hinder or impede it, that one should try to think of God in a general way, that He is everywhere, and that we are immersed in Him.
This is good, it seems to me, sometimes; but to withdraw completely from Christ or that this divine Body be counted in a balance with our own miseries or with all creation, I cannot endure. May it please His Majesty that I be able to explain myself.
2. I am not contradicting this theory; those who hold it are learned and spiritual men and they know what they are saying, and God leads souls by many paths and ways. I want to speak now of the way He led my soul -- I'm not considering other ways -- and of the danger I found myself in for wanting to put into practice what I was reading. I really believe that anyone who reaches the experience of union without passing beyond -- I mean to raptures and visions and other favors God grants to souls -- will think what is said in these books is the best practice, as I did. But if I should have kept to that practice, I believe I would never have arrived at where I am now because in my opinion the practice is a mistaken one. Now it could be that I am the mistaken one, but I'll speak of what happened to me.
3. I had no master and was reading these books in which I thought I was gradually coming to understand something. (And afterward I understood that if the Lord didn't show me, I was able to learn little from books, because there was nothing I understood until His Majesty gave me understanding through experience, nor did I know what I was doing). As a result, when I began to experience something of supernatural prayer, I mean of the prayer of quiet, I strove to turn aside from everything corporeal, although I did not dare lift up the soul -- since I was always so wretched, I saw that doing so would be boldness. But it seemed to me that I felt the presence of God, as was so, and I strove to recollect myself in His presence. This is a pleasing prayer, if God helps in it, and the delight is great. Since I felt that benefit and consolation, there was no one who could have made me return to the humanity of Christ; as a matter of fact, I thought the humanity was an impediment. O Lord of my soul and my Good, Jesus Christ crucified! At no time do I recall this opinion I had without feeling pain; it seems to me I became a dreadful traitor -- although in ignorance.
4. I had been so devoted all my life to Christ (for I held this opinion toward the end, that is, just before the Lord granted me these favors of raptures and visions, and I didn't remain long in so extreme a practice of it); and thus I always returned to my custom of rejoicing in this Lord, especially when I received Communion. I wanted to keep ever before my eyes a painting or image of Him since I was unable to keep Him as engraved in my soul as I desired. Is it possible, my Lord, that it entered my mind for even an hour that You would be an impediment to my greater good? Where have all my blessings come from but from You? I don't want to think I was at fault in this, because it deeply saddens me -- and certainly it was ignorance. Thus You desired, in Your goodness, to remedy the matter by sending me someone who would draw me away from this error -- and afterward by letting me see You so many times, as I shall explain later on -- so that I would understand more clearly how great the error is, and tell many persons what I just said, and put it in writing here.
5. In my opinion this practice is why many souls, when they reach the prayer of union, do not advance further or attain a very great freedom of spirit. It seems to me there are two reasons on which I can base my thinking. Perhaps I'm saying nothing, but what I'm about to say I've seen through experience. My soul was in a very bad state until the Lord gave it light. All its consolations were coming in small portions, and, once they were passed, it didn't then have the companionship of Christ to help in trials and temptations. The first reason is lack of humility in such persons; so small is this lack and so hidden and concealed that it goes unnoticed. Who is so proud and miserable -- as I am -- that they will not, after having labored the whole of life with as many penances, prayers, and persecutions as can be imagined, feel greatly enriched and well paid when the Lord allows them to remain at the foot of the cross with St. John? Not to feel greatly enriched by this could happen only to stupid persons like myself, for in every way I was losing when I should have been gaining.
6. If our nature or health doesn't allow us to think always about the Passion, since to do so would be arduous, who will prevent us from being with Him in His risen state? We have Him so near in the Blessed Sacrament, where He is already glorified and where we don't have to gaze upon Him as being so tired and worn out, bleeding, wearied by His journeys, persecuted by those for whom He did so much good, and not believed in by the Apostles. Certainly there is no one who can endure thinking all the time about the many trials He suffered. Behold Him here without suffering, full of glory, before ascending into heaven, strengthening some, encouraging others, our companion in the most Blessed Sacrament; it doesn't seem it was in His power to leave us for even a moment. And what a pity it was for me to have left You, my Lord, under the pretext of serving You more! When I was offending You I didn't know You; but how, once knowing You, did I think I could gain more by this path! Oh, what a bad road I was following, Lord! Now it seems to me I was walking on no path until You brought me back, for in seeing You at my side I saw all blessings. There is no trial that it wasn't good for me to suffer once I looked at You as You were, standing before the judges. Whoever lives in the presence of so good a friend and excellent a leader, who went ahead of us to be the first to suffer, can endure all things. The Lord helps us, strengthens us, and never fails; He is a true friend. And I see clearly, and I saw afterward, that God desires that if we are going to please Him and receive His great favors, we must do so through the most sacred humanity of Christ, in whom He takes His delight. Many, many times have I perceived this truth through experience. The Lord has told it to me. I have definitely seen that we must enter by this gate if we desire His sovereign Majesty to show us great secrets.
7. Thus your Reverence and lordship should desire no other path even if you are at the summit of contemplation; on this road you walk safely. This Lord of ours is the one through whom all blessings come to us. He will teach us these things. In beholding His life we find that He is the best example. What more do we desire than to have such a good friend at our side, who will not abandon us in our labors and tribulations, as friends in the world do? Blessed are they who truly love Him and always keep Him at their side! Let us consider the glorious St. Paul: it doesn't seem that any other name fell from his lips than that of Jesus, as coming from one who kept the Lord close to his heart. Once I had come to understand this truth, I carefully considered the lives of some of the saints, the great contemplatives, and found that they hadn't taken any other path: St. Francis demonstrates this through the stigmata; St. Anthony of Padua, with the Infant; St. Bernard found his delight in the humanity; St. Catherine of Siena -- and many others about whom your Reverence knows more than I.
8. This practice of turning aside from corporeal things must be good, certainly, since such spiritual persons advise it. But, in my opinion, the soul should be very advanced because until then it is clear that the Creator must be sought through creatures. Everything depends on the favor the Lord grants to each soul; this is not what I'm concerned with. What I wanted to explain was that the most sacred humanity of Christ must not be counted in a balance with other corporeal things. And may this point be well understood, for I should like to know how to explain myself.
9. When God desires to suspend all the faculties, as we have seen in the kinds of prayer that were mentioned, it is clear that, even though we may not so desire, this presence is taken away. Then let it be so -- gladly; blessed be such a loss that enables us to enjoy more that which it seems is lost. For then the soul is occupied completely in loving the One whom the intellect labored to know, and loves what it didn't understand, and rejoices in so great a joy that it couldn't have experienced it save by losing itself in order, as I say, to gain itself. But that we should skillfully and carefully accustom ourselves to avoid striving with all our strength to keep this most sacred humanity always present (and please the Lord it would be present always), this, I say, is what I don't think is good. The soul is left floating in the air, as they say; it seems it has no support no matter how much it may think it is full of God. It is an important thing that while we are living and are human we have human support. This disadvantage of not having human support leads to the other reason I referred to. With regard to the first reason, I already began to say that there is a small lack of humility in wanting to raise the soul up before the Lord raises it, in not being content to meditate on something so valuable, and in wanting to be Mary before having worked with Martha. When the Lord desires to raise up the soul, even if he does so from the first day, there is no reason for fear; but let us restrain ourselves as I believe I said before. This little speck of lack of humility, even though it seems to be nothing, does much harm to progress in contemplation.
10. Returning to the second point, we are not angels but we have a body. To desire to be angels while we are on earth -- and as much on earth as I was -- is foolishness. Ordinarily, thought needs to have some support. If at times the soul goes out of itself or goes about so full of God that it has no need of any created thing to become recollected, this isn't so usual. When one is in the midst of business matters, and in times of persecutions and trials, when one can't maintain so much quietude, and in times of dryness, Christ is a very good friend because we behold Him as man and see Him with weaknesses and trials -- and He is company for us. Once we have the habit, it is very easy to find Him present at our side, although there will come times when neither the one experience nor the other will be possible. In such an instance a good attitude is the one I've already mentioned: not to allow ourselves to be seekers of spiritual consolations. Thus, embracing the cross, come what may, is an important thing. This Lord was deprived of every consolation; they left Him alone in His trials. Let us not abandon Him, for He will give us better support than our own efforts that we might ascend higher, and He will absent Himself when He sees such absence is fitting and when He desires to draw the soul out of itself, as I said.
11. God is very pleased to see a soul that humbly takes His son as mediator and that loves this Son so much that even when His Majesty desires to raise it to very lofty contemplation, as I have said, it is aware of its unworthiness, saying with St. Peter: Depart from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man.
Such has been my experience; it's the way God has led my soul. Others will journey, as I've said, by another short cut. What I have come to understand is that this whole groundwork of prayer is based on humility and that the more a soul lowers itself in prayer the more God raises it up. I don't recall His ever having granted me one of the very notable favors of which I shall speak later if not at a time when I was brought to nothing at the sight of my wretchedness. And, so as to help me know myself, His Majesty even strove to give me an understanding of things that I wouldn't have known how to imagine. I hold that when the soul does something on its own to help itself in this prayer of union, even though this may at first seem beneficial, it will very soon fall again since it doesn't have a good foundation. I fear that it will never attain true poverty of spirit, which means being at rest in labors and dryness and not seeking consolation or comfort in prayer -- for earthly consolation has already been abandoned -- but seeking consolation in trials for love of Him who always lived in the midst of them. Although if some consolation is felt, it shouldn't cause the disturbance and pain it does to some persons who think that if they aren't always working with the intellect and striving for devotion all is lost -- as though so great a blessing could be merited by their labor. I don't say that they shouldn't strive carefully to remain in God's presence, but that if they can't even get a good thought, as I've mentioned elsewhere, they shouldn't kill themselves. We are useless servants, what do we think we can do?
12. But the Lord desires us to recognize our uselessness and become like the little donkeys that turn the waterwheel I've mentioned: although their eyes are blinded and they don't know what they are doing, they obtain more water than the gardener does with all his activity. People must walk along this path in freedom, placing themselves in the hands of God. If His Majesty should desire to raise us to the position of one who is an intimate and shares His secrets, we ought to accept gladly; if not, we ought to serve in the humbler tasks and not sit down in the best place, as I've once said. God is more careful than we are, and He knows what is fitting for each one. What do persons gain by governing themselves when they have given their wills entirely to God? In my opinion, much less is allowed here than in the first degree of prayer, and the harm that can come is much greater. These blessings are supernatural. If individuals have bad voices, the effort to sing does them no good no matter how hard they try; if God desires to give them good voices, there is no need beforehand that there be any shouting. Thus, with souls surrendered to His will, yet trusting in His greatness, let us always beseech God to grant us favors. Since the soul receives permission to remain at the feet of Christ, it should endeavor not to leave that place. Let is remain there as it desires; let it imitate the Magdalene, for if it is strong, God will lead it into the desert.
13. Thus, until your Reverence finds someone with more experience than I, and who knows better, you should keep to this opinion. If there are persons who are beginning to find delight in God, do not believe them if they think that by helping themselves they are making progress and finding more consolation. Oh, when God so wills, how He is revealed openly without these little helps from us! For however much we may do, He carries off the spirit as a giant would a piece of straw -- and no resistance suffices. What a strange belief it is, that the toad should expect to fly of itself whenever it wants. And it seems to me to be even more difficult and troublesome for our spirit to raise itself up if God doesn't raise it, for it is weighed down with the earth and a thousand obstacles, and wanting to fly profits it little. Although flying is more natural to it than to the toad, it is so bogged down in the mud that through its own faults it lost this ability.
14. Well I want to conclude by saying this: As often as we think of Christ we should recall the love with which He bestowed on us so many favors and what great love God showed us in giving us a pledge like this of His love, for love begets love. Even if we are at the very beginning and are very wretched, let us strive to keep this divine love always before our eyes and to waken ourselves to love. If at some time the Lord should favor us by impressing this love on our hearts, all will become easy for us, and we shall carry out our tasks quickly and without much effort. May His Majesty give this love -- since He knows how fitting it is for us -- on account of the love He bore us and on account of His glorious Son, who demonstrated His love for us at so great a cost to Himself, amen.
15. There is one thing I should like to ask your Reverence. When the Lord begins to grant such sublime favors to a soul, as is that of placing it in perfect contemplation, rightly speaking it should at once become completely perfect. Certainly this ought to be so because whoever receives so great a favor should not have to desire earthly consolations any more. Well why, then, as the soul grows accustomed to receiving favors and raptures, does it seem that the more favors it receives the more detached it becomes? For in one moment the Lord can leave it sanctified just as, with the passing of time, He afterward leaves it with perfection in the virtues?
This is what I want to know since I don't know what the answer is. What I do know well is the difference between the fortitude God leaves when in the beginning the favor lasts no longer than the blinking of an eye, and is almost not felt save in its effects, and that which He leaves when it lasts longer. Often it seems to me the reason is that the soul doesn't dispose itself completely until the Lord, fostering it little by little, gives it the determination and strength of an adult so that it might trample everything underfoot. What He did in a short time for the Magdalene His Majesty does for other persons in conformity with what they themselves do in order to allow Him to work. Let us not cease to believe that even in this life God gives the hundredfold.
16. I was also thinking about this comparison. Since what is given to those who are further advanced is totally the same as that given to them in the beginning, we can compare it to a food that many persons eat. Those who eat just a little are left only with a good taste in their mouths for a short while; those who eat more, receive nourishment; those who eat a great deal receive life and strength. So frequently can these latter eat and so filled are they from this food of life that they no longer eat anything that satisfies them other than this food. They see how beneficial it is to them, and their taste has so adapted to this sweetness that it would prefer not living to having to eat other things that serve for no more than to take away the pleasing taste the good food leaves behind.
Neither is conversation with a saintly companion as beneficial when it lasts only one day as when it lasts many; and if it is prolonged over many, it will make us similar to the other -- if God favors us. In the end, everything depends on what His Majesty desires and to whom He desires to give this food. But it is very important for whoever is already beginning to receive this favor to have the determination to become completely detached and to esteem the favor as it should be esteemed.
17. It also seems to me that His Majesty is testing to see who it is who loves Him; He tests now this one, now another, by revealing who He is with a superb delight and by quickening faith -- if it is dead -- in what He will give us, saying: "Look, this is but a drop from the vast sea of blessings." He does this so as to leave nothing undone for those who love Him; in the measure He sees that they receive Him, so He gives and is given. He loves whoever loves Him; how good a beloved! How good a friend! O Lord of my soul, who has the words to explain what You give to those who trust in You and to explain what those lose who reach this state and yet remain with themselves! Do not desire a loss like this, Lord, since You do so much in coming to a dwelling place as shabby as mine. May You be blessed forever and ever!
18. If your Reverence discusses with spiritual persons these things I have written on prayer, I again beg you that these persons be truly spiritual. For if they know only one road or have stalled in the middle, they will not be able to understand. There are some whom God right from the start leads by a very sublime path, and it seems to them that thus others will be able to profit by this path, quiet the intellect, and not make use of corporeal means, but in so doing those others will be left as dry as sticks. Some who have experienced a little quietude immediately think that since they have this quiet they can raise themselves up; and instead of advancing they slip backward, as I have said. So experience and discretion are necessary in all matters. May the Lord in His goodness give them to us.

CHAPTER 23
 
Returns to the account of her life, of how she began to seek greater perfection, and by what means. For persons trying to guide souls that practice prayer it is helpful to know how these souls must proceed in the beginning. How she profited from knowing about this.
 
1. I now want to return to where I left off about my life, for I think I delayed more than I should have so that what follows would be better understood. This is another, new book from here on -- I mean another, new life. The life dealt with up to this point was mine; the one I lived from the point where I began to explain these things about prayer is the one God lived in me -- according to the way it appears to me -- because I think it would have been impossible in so short a time to get rid of so many bad habits and deeds. May the Lord be praised who freed me from myself.
2. Now, then, when I began to avoid occasions and devote myself to prayer, the Lord, as one who desired, so it seemed, that I be willing to receive them, started to grant me favors. His Majesty began to give me the prayer of quiet very habitually -- and often, of union -- which lasted a long while. Since at that time other women had fallen into serious illusions and deceptions caused by the devil, I began to be afraid. I experienced wonderful delight and sweetness, and often without being able to avoid it, and in addition I was aware of the greatest assurance that this delight was from God, especially when I was in the prayer -- and I observed that I came out of it much improved and strengthened. But after a little distraction I began to fear and wonder whether the devil, making me think the experience was good, wanted me to suspend the intellect so that he could draw me away from mental prayer and so that I might not think upon the Passion or benefit from the use of the intellect, which seemed to me a great loss because I didn't understand this prayer.
3. Moreover, since His Majesty desired now to enlighten me so that I might no longer offend Him and might know my great debt to Him, this fear increased in such a way that it made me diligently seek out spiritual persons to consult. I had already heard about some because they had come to this town and were members of the Society of Jesus of which -- without knowing any of the members -- I was very fond, only from hearing about the mode of life and prayer they followed. But I didn't feel worthy to speak to them or strong enough to obey them, and this made me more fearful; it would have been a difficult thing for me to converse with them and yet be what I was.
4. I went about like this for some time until after a great struggle within me and many tears, I resolved both to talk to a spiritual person (to ask him what prayer it was I was experiencing and to enlighten me if I were going astray) and to do all I could so as not to offend God. For, as I just said, the lack of fortitude I saw in myself made me so timid. What a terrible mistake, God help me, that in wanting to be good I withdrew from good! The devil must meddle a great deal in this matter when virtue is beginning; I couldn't make the fear go away. He knows that the complete remedy for a soul lies in consulting the friends of God; thus I didn't have the determination to do this. I was waiting to amend first, as when I abandoned prayer, and perhaps I would never have done so, because I had fallen into little bad habits to such an extent that I was unable to understand they were bad. I needed the help of others and that they give me a hand to lift me up. Blessed be the Lord, for, finally, His was the first.
5. Since I saw that my fear was increasing -- because the prayer was increasing -- it seemed to me there was in the prayer either some great good or some terrible evil. I understood well that I was already experiencing something supernatural because sometimes I was unable to resist; to have it whenever I wanted was out of the question. I thought to myself there would be no remedy if I didn't strive to have a clean conscience and withdraw from every occasion, even if it concerned venial sins. For if the prayer were from God's Spirit, there would obviously be something to gain from striving for purity of conscience; if it were from the devil, my striving to please the Lord and not offend Him could do me little harm -- on the contrary, the devil would be the loser. Resolved to strive for this purity of conscience and beseeching the Lord to help me, I saw, after trying it for some days, that my soul didn't have the strength to reach such perfection alone on account of some attachments that, though in themselves were not bad, were enough to spoil everything.
6. They told me about a learned priest in this city whose goodness and edifying life the Lord had begun to make known to the people. I tried to get to speak to him through the help of a saintly gentleman who lives in this city. This gentleman is married, but he lives so exemplary and virtuous a life and is so prayerful and charitable that his goodness and perfection shine throughout the whole town. There is every reason for his renown because great good has come to many souls by means of him. He has so many talents that even though his state in life isn't a help to him, he cannot refrain from using them: he is most intelligent and very gentle with everyone; his conversation, not at all boring, so mild and charming as well as upright and holy, is most pleasing to those with whom he deals; he directs everything toward the great good of the souls with whom he is conversing; and it doesn't seem that he has any other concern than to do for everyone what he sees is possible and to be pleasing to all.
7.Well, this blessed and holy man, with his diligence, it seems to me, was the principal means by which my soul was saved. His humility amazes me. I believe he has practiced prayer for a little less than forty years -- I don't know if it's two or three years less. He lives a complete life of perfection insofar as it seems his state allows. His wife is such a great servant of God and so charitable that he is not held back by her. In sum, God chose her to be the wife of someone who He knew would be a great servant of His. Some of his relatives were married to some of mine; he also had a good deal of association with another great servant of God who was married to a cousin of mine.
8. In this way I arranged that the priest I said was such a servant of God would come to speak to me. This gentleman was a great friend of that priest whom I thought I could take as my confessor and master. When he brought him to speak to me, I was most embarrassed to find myself in the presence of so holy a man, and I gave him an account of my soul and my prayer; but I didn't want him to hear my confession. I told him I was very busy -- and that was true. He began with a holy determination to guide me as though I were a strong person -- for by rights I should have been so because of the prayer he observed I was experiencing -- in order that I might in no way offend God. When I saw him at once so determined about little things that, as I say, I didn't have the fortitude to give up immediately and so perfectly, I was afflicted. Since I saw he was taking my soul's attachments as something I would have to die to all at once, I realized there was need for much more caution.
9. In sum, I understood that the means he gave me were not the ones by which I could remedy my situation, because they were suited to a more perfect soul. As for myself, even though I was advanced in receiving favors from God, I was very much at the beginning with regard to virtues and mortification. Certainly, if I were to have had no one else but him to speak to, I believe my soul would never have improved. For the affliction I felt in seeing that I did not do -- nor did it seem I could do -- that which he told me would have been enough to make me lose hope and give up everything.
I sometimes marvel that God was not pleased that this priest, being a person who has a particular grace for beginning to lead souls to God, understand my soul and take charge of it. I see that what happened was all for my greater good, that I might get to know and deal with people as holy as are those of the Society of Jesus.
10. It was then that I arranged that the holy gentleman come sometime to see me. Here I saw his great humility, that he wished to talk to someone as wretched as myself. He began to visit me, encourage me, and tell me that I shouldn't think I could give up everything in one day, that little by little God would do the work, that he himself had been for some years unable to make a break with some very trivial things. O humility, what great blessings you bestow where you are present and on those who approach the one who possesses you! This saint (for in my opinion I can rightly call him by this name), in his humility and for my benefit, told me about his weakness, which to him seemed to be such. Considering what was in conformity with his state in life, there was no fault or imperfection -- whereas my having such weaknesses would have been the greatest fault with respect to my state of life.
I do not mention this without a reason, for it seems I am going on at length about trifles; but these things are so important in beginning to help a soul and show it how to fly (for it still hasn't any wings, as they say) that no one will believe what I say save the one who has passed through it. Because I hope in God that your Reverence will be able to help many souls, I mention it here; this gentleman was my complete salvation in knowing how to cure me and in having the humility and the charity of stay with me -- and patience while seeing that I wasn't making amends in everything. He proceeded with discretion little by little showing me ways to conquer the devil. I began to have such a great love for him that there was no greater recreation for me than on the days I saw him, although they were few. When he was late, I became very worried because it then seemed to me that since I was so wretched he wasn't going to see me.
11. Since he was getting to know my very great imperfections, and they would even be sins -- although after I spoke with him I made greater amends -- and since I mentioned to him the favors granted me by God so that he could give me light, he told me that my imperfections were incompatible with the favors and that these gifts were bestowed on persons who were already very advanced and mortified, that he couldn't help but fear a great deal because in some things it seemed to him there was a bad spirit, although he didn't come to a definite conclusion. But he thought well of all that he understood about my prayer, and he said so. The difficulty was that I didn't know how to say either little or much about my prayer; for only recently did God give me this favor of understanding what it is and knowing how to speak about it.
12. Since this gentleman told me about his fear, and with the fear I already had, I felt greatly afflicted and shed many tears. For, certainly, I desired to please God, and I could not persuade myself that the devil was the cause. But I feared that on account of my great sins God blinded me so that I couldn't know the cause. Looking through books in order to see if I could learn how to explain the prayer I was experiencing, I found in one they called Ascent of the Mount, where it touches upon the union of the soul with God, all the signs I experienced in that not thinking of anything. This is what I was most often saying: that when I experienced that prayer I wasn't able to think of anything. I marked the pertinent passages and gave him the book so that he and the other priest I mentioned, the saintly one and servant of God, might look it over and tell me what I should do, and that if they thought I should, I would give up prayer completely -- for why should I place myself in these dangers. If at the end of almost twenty years in which I practiced prayer, I showed no gain but was deceived by the devil, it would be better not to practice it -- although this too would have been arduous for me because I had already experienced what my soul was without prayer. As a result, I saw danger everywhere. I was like a person in the middle of a river trying to get out; wherever she goes she fears greater peril there; and she is almost drowning.
It is a very severe trial, this one; and I have suffered many of these, as I shall say afterward. Although the matter may seem unimportant, perhaps it will be helpful for an understanding of how the spirit must be tried.
13. And certainly it is a great one, the trial that is suffered; and caution is necessary, especially with women, because our weakness is great, and a lot of harm could be done by telling us outright that the cause is the devil. But the matter should be considered carefully, and they should turn aside from any dangers there might be and should be counseled on the importance of keeping things secret; this secrecy is fitting.
In this respect I am speaking as one who is suffering a bitter trial because some persons with whom I have discussed my prayer are not keeping it secret, but in consulting this one and that other, they have truly done me great harm. They have spread things that should have remained very secret -- these matters are not for everybody -- and it seemed that I was the one who published them abroad. I believe the Lord permitted it without any fault on their part so that I might suffer. I'm not saying they spoke about what I discussed with them in confession. But since they were persons to whom because of my fears I gave an account of myself that they might enlighten me, it seemed to me they should have kept quiet. Nonetheless, I never dared to conceal anything from these persons.
Well, I'm saying that one should counsel these souls with great discretion, encouraging them and biding one's time until the Lord helps them as He did me. If I had not been so treated, the greatest harm would have been done to me because I was frightened and scared. With the serious heart trouble I had, I'm amazed that much damage wasn't done to me.
14. Since I gave them both the books as well as an account of my life and sins as best I could (not through confession, since one of them was a layman, but I explained clearly how wretched I was), the two servants of God considered with great charity and love what was fitting for me.
I awaited the answer with terrible fear; after I had recommended myself to the prayers of many persons and prayed a great deal myself during those days, one of them with much anguish came and told me that in the considered opinion of both of them the cause was the devil. He told me I should take the matter up with a priest from the Society of Jesus, that if I asked the priest, telling of my need he would come, and that I should give an account of my whole life and state by a general confession and be very frank in all, that by the power of the sacrament of confession God would enlighten him, that these Fathers were very experienced in spiritual matters, and that I shouldn't neglect anything he might tell me, because I was in serious danger if I didn't have someone to guide me.
15. This frightened and pained me so much that I didn't know what to do; I was all tears. And while in an oratory very much afflicted, not knowing what would become of me, I read in a book -- which it seems the Lord placed in my hands -- what St. Paul said, that God was very faithful, that He would never let those who love Him be deceived by the devil. This consoled me very deeply.
I began to prepare my general confession and put down in writing all the good and bad things -- as clear an account of my life as I knew how to give, without leaving anything out.
I recall that after I had written it, I saw so many evils and so little of anything good that I was terribly distressed and in the greatest anguish. Also I was pained that persons in the house would see me speak with people as holy as are those of the Society of Jesus. For I was in fear of my wretchedness; it seemed to me I was going to have greater obligation to avoid evil and my pastimes, and that things would grow worse if I didn't do this. So I arranged with the sacristan and portress not to tell anyone. This proved of little avail, for it happened that when they called me someone was standing near the door who then went throughout the whole convent telling about who came to see me. But what obstacles and what fears the devil places in the path of the one who wants to reach God!
16. After I spoke with the servant of God -- for he was very much so and most wise -- all about my soul, as to someone who well knew this language, he explained to me what I was experiencing and greatly encouraged me. He said it was very recognizably from God's Spirit, but that it was necessary to return again to prayer, that the prayer did not have a good foundation, and that I had not begun to understand mortification (and that was true, for it doesn't seem to me I even understood the word), that I should by no means give up prayer but strive very hard since God had granted me such special favors. He wondered if the Lord didn't desire to do good for many persons through me, and said other things (for it seems he prophesied what the Lord afterward did with me) and pointed out that I would be very much at fault if I didn't respond to the favors God was granting me. In all that he said it seemed to me, according to what was impressed upon my soul, that the Holy Spirit was speaking through him in order to heal me.
17. He made me very ashamed; he guided me by means that seemed to change me completely. What a great thing it is to understand a soul! He told me that I should devote prayer each day to a phase of the Passion, that I should benefit from this prayer and dwell only on the humanity, and that I should resist those experiences of recollection and consolation as much as I could and in such a way that I would make no room for them until he told me otherwise.
18. He left me consoled and encouraged, and the Lord helped me and him to understand my situation and how I should be guided. I remained determined not to lapse from his orders in anything, and I continued to be so determined to this day. Praised be the Lord who has given me the grace to obey my confessors, even though imperfectly; they have almost always been these blessed men from the Society of Jesus -- although, as I say, I have followed them imperfectly.
My soul began to improve noticeably, as I shall now describe.

