CHAPTER 27
 
Treats of another way in which the Lord instructs the soul and, without speaking to it, makes His will known in a wonderful manner. Explains also a non-imaginative vision and great favor the Lord granted her. This chapter is very noteworthy.
 
1. Well, to return to the account of my life. I was enduring this difficult affliction, and, as I have said, many prayers were being offered up that the Lord might lead me by another safer path since this one, they told me, was so suspect. The truth of the matter is that even though I was beseeching God and however much I wanted to desire another path, it wasn't in my power to desire it, even though I always prayed for it, because I saw my soul so improved -- except sometimes when I was very worn out from the things they told me and the fears they caused. I saw that I was a completely different person. I could not desire another path, but I placed myself in the hands of God that He would carry out His will completely in me; He knew what suited me. I saw that on this road I was being led to heaven, that previously I had been going to hell, and that I should want to follow this road and not believe that it had the devil as cause. Nor was I able to force myself, even though I did all I could, to believe and desire another road; it wasn't in my power to do so. I offered up what I did, if there was some good deed, for this intention. I invoked my favorite saints that they might free me from the devil. I made novenas. I recommended myself to St. Hilarion and to St. Michael the Archangel, of whom again I became a devotee for this purpose, and I begged many other saints that the Lord might show the truth -- I mean that they might obtain this for me from His Majesty.
2. After two years of all these prayers of mine and those of others offered for the said intention (that the Lord would either lead me by another way or make known the truth, for the locutions I mentioned that the Lord granted me were experienced very repeatedly), the following happened to me. Being in prayer on the feastday of the glorious St. Peter, I saw or, to put it better, I felt Christ beside me; I saw nothing with my bodily eyes or with my soul, but it seemed to me that Christ was at my side -- I saw that it was He, in my opinion, who was speaking to me. Since I was completely unaware that there could be a vision like this one, it greatly frightened me in the beginning; I did nothing but weep. However, by speaking one word alone to assure me, the Lord left me feeling as I usually did: quiet, favored, and without any fear. It seemed to me that Jesus Christ was always present at my side; but since this wasn't an imaginative vision, I didn't see any form. Yet I felt very clearly that He was always present at my right side and that He was the witness of everything I did. At no time in which I was a little recollected, or not greatly distracted, was I able to ignore that He was present at my side.
3. I immediately went very anxiously to my confessor to tell him. He asked me in what form I saw Him. I answered that I didn't see Him. He asked how I knew that it was Christ. I answered that I didn't know how, but that I couldn't help knowing that He was beside me, that I saw and felt Him clearly, that my recollection of soul was greater, and that I was very continuously in the prayer of quiet, that the effects were much different from those I usually experienced, and that it was very clear.
I could do nothing but draw comparisons in order to explain myself. And, indeed, there is no comparison that fits this kind of vision very well. Since this vision is among the most sublime (as I was afterward told by a very holy and spiritual man, whose name is Friar Peter of Alcántara and of whom I shall speak later, and by other men of great learning) and the kind in which the devil can interfere the least of all, there are no means by which those of us who know little here below can explain it. Learned men will explain it better. For if I say that I see it with the eyes neither of the body nor of the soul, because it is not an imaginative vision, how do I know and affirm that He is more certainly at my side than if I saw Him? It is incorrect to think that the vision is like that experience of those who are blind or in the dark who don't see the other at their side. There is some likeness in this comparison but not a great deal, because in such a case these people experience with their senses; either they hear the other person speak or stir, or they touch them. In the vision there is nothing of this, nor do you see darkness; but the vision is represented through knowledge given to the soul that is clearer than sunlight. I don't mean that you see the sun or brightness, but that a light, without your seeing light, illumines the intellect so that the soul may enjoy such a great good. The vision bears with it wonderful blessings.
4. This vision is not like the presence of God that is often felt, especially by those who experience the prayer of union or quiet, in which it seems that in desiring to begin to practice prayer we find Him to speak to, and it seems we know that He hears us through the effects and spiritual feelings of great love and faith that we tenderly experience, and through other resolutions. This presence is a great favor from God and should be highly esteemed by the one He gives it to, for it is a very sublime prayer, but it is not a vision; in this prayer of union or quiet one understands that God is present by the effects that, as I say, He grants to the soul -- that is the way His Majesty wants to give the experience of Himself. In this vision it is seen clearly that Jesus Christ, son of the Virgin, is present. In the prayer of union or quiet some impressions of the Divinity are bestowed; in this vision, along with the impressions, you see that also the most sacred humanity accompanies us and desires to grant us favors.
5. Then the confessor asked me, "Who said it was Jesus Christ?" "He told me many times," I answered. But before He told me He impressed upon my intellect that it was He, and before doing this latter He told me He was present -- but I didn't see Him. If a person whom I had never seen but only heard of should come to speak to me while I was blind or in the pitch dark and tell me who he was, I would believe it; but I wouldn't be able to assert as strongly that it was that person as I would if I saw him. In the case of this vision, I would; for, without being seen, it is impressed with such clear knowledge that I don't think it can be doubted. The Lord desires to be so engraved upon the intellect that this vision can no more be doubted than can what is seen; and even less, because when we see we sometimes suspect we may have fancied what we saw. In this vision, even though a suspicion may at first arise, there remains on the other hand such great certitude that the doubt has no force.
6. Hence, there is also another way in which God teaches the soul and speaks to it, different from the manner of speaking described previously. It is a language that belongs so to heaven that here on earth it is poorly understood, no matter how much we may desire to tell about it, if the Lord does not teach us through experience. The Lord puts what He wants the soul to know very deeply within it, and there He makes this known without image or explicit words, but in the manner of this vision we mentioned. And this manner in which God gives the soul understanding of His desires and great truths and mysteries is worthy of close attention. Often this is the way I understand when His Majesty explains some vision He wishes to represent to me. It seems to me that for the following reasons the devil can interfere least in this experience. If these reasons aren't good ones, I must be wrong.
7. This kind of vision and language is something so spiritual that there is no restlessness in the faculties or in the senses, in my opinion, by which the devil can deduce anything. Sometimes -- briefly -- this suspension takes place; but at other times it seems to me that the faculties are not suspended, nor are the senses withdrawn but very much present. This vision and locution doesn't always come during contemplation; it very seldom does. Yet, when it comes, I say that we neither act nor do anything; all seems to be the work of the Lord. It's as though the food were already placed in the stomach without our eating it or knowing how it got there. It is clearly known to be there, although the stomach doesn't know what food it is or who put it there. But in the case of these locutions, the intellect does know, yet it doesn't know how the locution got there; nothing is seen or understood, nor was the soul ever moved to desire it -- nor had I ever been informed that this was possible.
8. In the locution we spoke of previously, God makes the intellect become aware -- even though it may not wish to do so -- and understand what is said; in that experience the soul seemingly has other ears with which it hears, and God makes it listen, and it is not distracted. It's like this: if people have good hearing and don't block their ears and are spoken to in a loud voice, they hear, even though they may not want to; and, in fact, they do something, since they are attentive in order to understand what is spoken to them.
In the locution we are now speaking of, there is none of the above; even this little thing of only listening, which the soul did in the previous locution, is taken away. It finds everything prepared and eaten. There is nothing more to do than to enjoy, as in the example of someone who without having learned or done any work to know how to read, and without having studied anything, would find that all knowledge was possessed inwardly, without knowing how or where it was gotten since no studying had been done, nor even had the abc's been learned.
9. This last comparison seems to me to explain something about this heavenly gift, for the soul sees that in an instant it is wise; the mystery of the Blessed Trinity and other sublime things are so explained that there is no theologian with whom it would not dispute in favor of the truth of these grandeurs. It is left full of amazement; one of these favors is enough to change a soul completely, free it from the love of things, and make it love Him who it sees makes it capable, without any effort of its own, of blessings so great, who communicates secrets to it and treats it with such friendship and love that one cannot describe this in writing. He grants some favors that would be suspect, since they are so admirable and granted to someone who has so little merited them. Those who don't have a very living faith will be unable to believe in them. So I am thinking of speaking but little of the favors the Lord granted me -- unless I'm ordered to do otherwise -- except for certain visions that can do some good for others; or so that the one to whom the Lord may grant them doesn't become frightened, as I did, in thinking the experience is impossible; or that I might explain the manner and path by which the Lord led me, which is what they commanded me to write about.
10. Returning then to the discussion of this kind of understanding, it seems to me that the Lord in every way wants this soul to have some knowledge of what goes on in heaven. I think that just as in heaven you understand without speaking (which I certainly never knew until the Lord in His goodness desired that I should see and showed Himself to me in a rapture), so it is in this vision. For God and the soul understand each other only through the desire His Majesty has that it understand Him, without the use of any other means devised to manifest the love these two friends have for each other. It's like the experience of two persons here on earth who love each other deeply and understand each other well; even without signs, just by a glance, it seems, they understand each other. This must be similar to what happens in the vision; without our knowing how, these two lovers gaze directly at each other, as the Bridegroom says to the Bride in the Song of Songs -- I think I heard that it is there.
11. O admirable kindness of God, You allow me to gaze upon You with eyes that have so badly gazed as have those of my soul. May they, Lord, become accustomed through this vision not to look at base things, so that nothing outside of You might satisfy them! O ingratitude of mortals! To what extremes will you go? For I know through experience that what I say is true and that what can be said is the least of what You do, Lord, for a soul You bring to such frontiers. O souls that have begun to practice prayer and have true faith, what good things can you still seek in this life -- leaving aside what is gained for eternity -- that could compare with the least of these favors?
12. Reflect that it is indeed certain that God gives Himself in this way to those who give up all for Him. He shows no partiality, He loves everyone. Nobody has any excuse, no matter how miserable they may be, since the Lord so acts with me in bringing me to such a state. Note that what I say is not even a compendium of what could be said. I only say what is necessary to explain this kind of vision and favor the Lord grants the soul. But I can't describe what is felt when the Lord gives it an understanding of His secrets and grandeurs, the delight that so surpasses all those knowable here on earth; indeed, it rightly makes you abhor the delights of this life, which together are all rubbish. I would find it revolting to have to try to make a comparison between the two delights, even if those of earth were to last forever and those given by the Lord were only a drop of water from the vast overflowing river that is prepared for us.
13. It is a shame, and I certainly am ashamed of myself; if one were able to be embarrassed in heaven, I would be more embarrassed there than anyone! Why must we want so many blessings and delights and so much endless glory all at the cost of the good Jesus? Shall we not at least weep with the daughters of Jerusalem since we do not, with the Cyrenian, help Him carry His cross? How can we enjoy along with pleasures and pastimes what He won for us at the cost of so much blood? It's impossible! And do we think that with vain honors we can imitate Him in the contempt He suffered so that we might reign forever? Such a road leads nowhere; it's the wrong, wrong road; we will never arrive by it.
Your Reverence ought to cry out these truths since God has taken from me freedom to do so. I should like them to be proclaimed to me always; yet I've been so slow myself to hear and understand God, as will be seen in what is written here, that it is very embarrassing to speak about this; as a result I desire to be silent. I shall only say what sometimes comes to mind. May it please the Lord to bring me to the goal that I might enjoy this blessing.
14. What accidental glory and what happiness will be the lot of the blessed when they see that, even though late, nothing possible remained for them to do for God and that in conformity with their strength and state they left nothing undone for Him, and in having more, gave more! How rich they will find that they are, they who have left all riches for Christ! How honored will they be, they who have not sought honor from Him but have enjoyed seeing themselves humbled! How wise will they be, they who rejoiced to be considered mad because that is what Wisdom Himself was called! How few madmen there are now -- on account of our sins! Truly it seems that now there are no more of those whom people considered mad for doing the heroic deeds of true lovers of Christ. O world, world, how you go on gaining in honor by having few who know you!
15. But do we think that God is now served more if we are considered wise and discreet! That really must be the reason so much discretion is used. We are quick to believe that not much edification is given if each one doesn't proceed, according to one's state, with composure and authority. Even a friar, cleric, or nun would think that to wear something old and patched would be a kind of novelty and would give scandal to the weak; and that even recollection and the practice of prayer would do this. The world has such a mentality and has so forgotten the great perfection and lofty impulses of love the saints experienced that I think this mentality causes more harm and misfortune in these troubled times we live in than the scandals caused by religious when they back up with deeds what they say with words about how little the world should be esteemed; from such scandals the Lord draws forth great blessings. If some are scandalized, others come to their senses. At least there would be offered an image of what Christ and His Apostles suffered since now more than ever such an image is needed.
16. And what a good image of Christ God took from us now in the blessed Friar Peter of Alcántara! The world cannot at this time endure so much perfection. They say that our health is weaker and that these times are not like those of the past. Yet this holy man belonged to the present age. His spirit is large, as in times past; so he trampled the world under foot. Although others may not be detached or perform such harsh penance as he, there are many ways, as I've said at other times, of trampling on the world; the Lord teaches them when He sees the courage. And what marvelous courage His Majesty gave this great saint of whom I'm speaking in order that he perform such rough penance, as everyone knows, for forty-seven years! I want to say something about this penance, for I know the facts are all true.
17. He told me of it, and also another person from whom he hid nothing. (The reason he told me was his love for me, for the Lord desired this so that he would return and encourage me at a time of great need, as I said and will say.) I think he told me that for forty years he slept only an hour and a half during the night and that in the beginning this was his greatest penitential trial, to conquer sleep, and that to do this he was always either on his knees or standing. When he did sleep, he did so sitting up, with his head resting on a little log nailed to the wall. He could not have stretched out even if he wanted to, because his cell -- as is known -- was no larger than four and a half feet. However hot or rainy the weather was in all those years, he never put up his cowl; he wore nothing on his feet, nor did he wear any clothes other than a coarse serge habit with nothing else to cover the body -- that was as tight as could be, and a short mantle over it made of the same material. He told me that when it was terribly cold he took the mantle off and left the door and little window of his cell opened so that afterward by putting the mantle on again and closing the door he was able to appease the body by the warmth that came from more covering. Eating every third day was a very common practice for him, and he told me when I showed surprise that it was easily possible for anyone who got used to doing so. One of his companions told me that once Friar Peter went eight days without eating. It must have happened while he was in prayer, for he experienced great raptures and impulses of love of God, of which I was once a witness.
18. His practice of poverty and mortification during his youth was extreme. He told me that he had lived in a house of his order for three years and, because he had never raised his eyes, had not known any of the friars save by their voice, and that he hadn't known how to get to the places where he had go, but followed the other friars. This he did on his journeys. He never looked at women for many years. He told me that it no longer made any difference whether he saw or did not see. But he was very old when I came to know him, and so extremely weak that it seemed he was made of nothing but tree roots.
Yet with all this sanctity he was very affable, although his words were few unless he was questioned. He was very pleasant in his speech because he had a bright mind. There are many other things I should like to say, but I am afraid your Reverence will ask why I'm getting into all this -- and I've written it with this fear. Hence, I will conclude by saying that his ending was like his life, preaching to his friars and admonishing them. When he saw that he was dying, he recited the psalm, Laetatus sum in his quae dicta sunt mihi, and casting himself on his knees, he died.
19. Afterward the Lord was pleased that I receive more help from him -- through the counsel he gave me about many matters -- than I did during his life. I have often seen him in the greatest glory. He told me the first time he appeared to me that the penance that merited such a reward was a blessed penance, and many other things. One year before he died, though being some leagues away from here, he appeared to me; since I knew he was going to die, I told him so. When he died, he appeared to me and told me that he was going to his rest. I didn't believe it, but did tell some persons; after eight days the news came that he was dead, or, better, that he had begun to live forever.
20. Behold how this harsh life ended with such great glory. I think he consoles me much more than when he was here on earth. The Lord once told me that nothing would be sought in Friar Peter's name that He would not bestow. Many of the things I've recommended to his prayers I've seen fulfilled. May the Lord be blessed forever, amen.
21. But what a discourse I've got into! May it awaken your Reverence so that you will not esteem anything pertaining to this life -- as though you didn't know and weren't already determined to abandon all, and hadn't already put this renunciation into practice!
I see so much perdition in the world that even though my writing about it brings me no more benefit than to tire me out, I find rest in doing so; for everything I have written is against myself. May the Lord pardon me for my offenses against Him in this matter, and may your Reverence do so too, for I tire you unintentionally. It appears that I want you to do penance for my sins in this matter.

CHAPTER 28
 
Deals with the great favors the Lord granted her and how He appeared to her the first time. Explains what an imaginative vision is. Tells about the remarkable effects and signs this vision leaves behind when it is from God. This is a very instructive chapter and well worth nothing.
 
1. To return to our topic, I passed some days -- a few -- in which I experienced this vision continually; it did me so much good that I never left prayer. No matter how much I did, I strove that it be done in such a way that it would not displease the One who I clearly saw was witnessing it. And although sometimes I was afraid on account of all the warnings they were giving, this fear didn't last long, because the Lord was giving me assurance.
One day, while I was in prayer, the Lord desired to show me only His hands which were so very beautiful that I would be unable to exaggerate the beauty. This vision caused me great fear; any supernatural favor the Lord grants me frightens me at first, when it is new. After a few days I saw also that divine face which it seems left me completely absorbed. Since afterward He granted me the favor of seeing Him entirely, I couldn't understand why the Lord showed Himself to me in this way, little by little, until later I understood that His Majesty was leading me in accordance with my natural weakness. May He be blessed forever! So much glory would have been unbearable next to so lowly and wretched a subject as I; and as one who knew this, the merciful Lord was preparing me.
2. It will seem to your Reverence that strength like this wasn't necessary to see some hands and so beautiful a face. Glorified bodies have such beauty that the sight of so supernatural a beauty deriving from glory causes confusion. Thus the vision caused me a fear so great that I was completely agitated and disturbed, although afterward I remained so certain and secure and felt such other effects that I immediately lost the fear.
3. One feastday of St. Paul, while I was at Mass, this most sacred humanity in its risen form was represented to me completely, as it is in paintings, with such wonderful beauty and majesty; I have written about it in particular to your Reverence when you insistently ordered me to do so. And writing about it was very difficult for me to do because one cannot describe this vision without ruining it. But as best I could I have already told you about it, and so there is no reason to speak of it here again. I only say that if there were nothing else to provide delight for one's vision in heaven than the exalted beauty of glorified bodies, this vision would be very great glory, especially the vision of the humanity of Jesus Christ, our Lord. And if even here on earth His Majesty shows Himself according to what our wretchedness can bear, what will be the glory when such a blessing is enjoyed completely?
4. I never saw this vision -- nor any other -- with my bodily eyes, even though it is an imaginative one.
Those who know more about these matters than I say that the intellectual vision is more perfect than this one and that this one is much more perfect than visions seen with the bodily eyes. These latter, corporeal visions, they say, are the lowest and the kind in which the devil can cause more illusions; although at that time I couldn't understand this. But since an imaginative vision was being granted to me, I desired that I might see it with my bodily eyes so that my confessor wouldn't tell me that I had imagined it. And after the vision passed away, it also happened to me -- and this was at once -- that I thought that I had imagined it; thinking I had deceived my confessor, I was bothered about having told it to him. This was another cause for tears, and I went and explained to him. He asked me whether it just seemed to me that I had deceived him or whether I had desired to deceive him. I told him the truth, for, in my opinion, I had not lied, nor had I intended to; nor for anything in the world would I say one thing for another. He well knew this, and so he tried to calm me. I felt so sorry for having gone to him with these things, for I don't know how the devil got me to torment myself with the thought that I had made up the vision.
But so quickly did the Lord grant me this favor and declare this truth that very soon the doubt about my imagining it left me, and afterward I saw clearly my foolishness. If I should have spent many years trying to imagine how to depict something so beautiful, I couldn't have, nor would I have known how to; it surpasses everything imaginable here on earth, even in just its whiteness and splendor.
5. The splendor is not one that dazzles; it has a soft whiteness, is infused, gives the most intense delight to the sight, and doesn't tire it; neither does the brilliance, in which is seen the vision of so divine a beauty, tire it. It is a light so different from earthly light that the sun's brightness that we see appears very tarnished in comparison with that brightness and light represented to the sight, and so different that afterward you wouldn't want to open your eyes. It's like the difference between a sparkling, clear water that flows over crystal and on which the sun is reflecting and a very cloudy, muddy water flowing along the ground. This doesn't mean that the sun is represented or that the light resembles sunlight. It seems in fact like natural light, and the sunlight seems artificial. It is a light that has no night; nothing troubles it. In sum, it is of such a kind that a person couldn't imagine what it is like in all of life's days no matter how powerful the intellect. God gives it so suddenly that there wouldn't even be time to open your eyes, if it were necessary to open them. For when the Lord desires to give the vision, it makes no more difference if they are opened than if they are closed; even if we do not desire to see the vision, it is seen. No distraction is enough to resist it, nor is there power or diligence or care enough to do so. I have clearly experienced this, as I shall say.
6. What I should now like to speak of is the way in which the Lord reveals Himself by means of these visions. I don't mean that I shall explain how such a strong light can be put in the interior faculty and so clear an image put in the intellect -- for it seems truly that that's where it is -- because this is something for men of learning to explain. The Lord has not given me understanding of how this is done, and I am so ignorant and my intellect so dull that to no matter what extent these men of learning have desired to explain to me how this vision comes about, I have still not been able to understand. It is certain that even though it seems to your Reverence that I have a lively intellect, I do not. In many things I've experienced that I don't know any more than what is given me to eat, as the saying goes. Sometimes my confessors have been amazed at my ignorance. And I have never understood, nor have I desired to understand, how God causes this vision or how it could come about, nor did I ask, even though, as I have said, for many years now I've had contact with competent men of learning. Whether something was a sin or not -- yes, this I did discuss with them. As for the rest, it wasn't necessary for me to think anything but that God did it all. I saw there was no reason for me to be startled but to praise Him. Indeed the difficult things He does cause more devotion in me; and the more difficult, the more devotion they cause.
7. I shall then say what I have come to see through experience. How the Lord does it, your Reverence will speak of better than I, and will explain what remains obscure and what I may not have known how to say. It seemed clear to me in some cases that what I saw was an image, but in many other instances, no; rather, it was Christ Himself by reason of the clarity with which He was pleased to reveal Himself to me. Sometimes the vision was so obscure that it seemed to me an image, not like an earthly drawing no matter how perfect it may be -- for I have seen many good ones. It is foolish to think that an earthly drawing can look anything like a vision; it does so no more nor less than living persons resemble their portraits. No matter how good the portrait may have turned out, it can't look so natural that in the end it isn't recognized as a dead thing. But let us leave this example aside; it applies well here and is very exact.
8. I don't say this example is a comparison -- for comparisons are never so exact -- but the truth. The difference lies in that which there is between living persons and paintings of them -- no more nor less. For if what is seen is an image, it is a living image -- not a dead man, but the living Christ. And He makes it known that He is both man and God, not as He was in the tomb but as He was when He came out of the tomb after His resurrection. Sometimes He comes with such great majesty that no one could doubt but that it is the Lord Himself. Especially after receiving Communion -- for we know that He is present, since our faith tells us this -- He reveals Himself as so much the lord of this dwelling that it seems the soul is completely dissolved; and it sees itself consumed in Christ. O my Jesus! Who could make known the majesty with which You reveal Yourself! And, Lord of all the world and of the heavens, of a thousand other worlds and of numberless worlds, and of the heavens that You might create, how the soul understands by the majesty with which You reveal Yourself that it is nothing for You to be Lord of the world!
9. In this vision the powerlessness of all the devils in comparison with Your power is clearly seen, my Jesus; and it is seen how whoever is pleasing to You can trample all hell under foot. In this vision the reason is seen why the devils feared when You descended into limbo and why they would have preferred to be in another thousand lower hells in order to flee from such great majesty. I see that You want the soul to know how tremendous this majesty is and the power that this most sacred humanity joined with the Divinity has. In this vision there is a clear representation of what it will be like on Judgment Day to see the majesty of this King and to see its severity toward those who are evil. This vision is the source of the true humility left in the soul when it sees its misery, which it cannot ignore. This vision is the source of confusion and true repentance for sins; although the soul sees that He shows love, it doesn't know where to hide, and so it is completely consumed.
I say that this vision has such tremendous power when the Lord desires to show the soul a great part of His grandeur and majesty that it would be impossible for any subject to endure it -- unless the Lord should want to help it very supernaturally by placing it in rapture and ecstasy since in the enjoyment of that divine presence the vision of it is lost.
Is it true that it is forgotten afterward? That majesty and beauty remain so impressed that they are unforgettable, except when the Lord wishes the soul to suffer a great dryness and solitude of which I shall speak further on; for then it seems it even forgets God. The soul undergoes a change; it is always absorbed; it seems that a new, living, high degree of love is beginning. For although the intellectual vision, of which I spoke, that represents God in an imageless way is more perfect, a wonderful thing happens when so divine a presence is represented in the imagination so that in conformity with our weakness this presence can last in the memory and keep the thought well occupied. These two kinds of vision almost always come together. This is the way they occur: with the eyes of the soul we see the excellence, beauty, and glory of the most holy humanity; and through the intellectual vision, which was mentioned, we are given an understanding of how God is powerful, that He can do all things, that He commands all and governs all, and that His love permeates all things.
10. This vision is very worthy of esteem and, in my opinion, there is no danger in it, because by its effects it is known that the devil has no power here. It seems to me he has wanted to represent the Lord Himself in this way three or four times by a false representation. He takes the form of flesh, but he can't counterfeit the image by giving it the glory that it has when it comes from God. He makes representations so as to destroy the true vision the soul has seen; but the soul of itself resists and is agitated, displeased, and disturbed since it loses the devotion and delight it had before and remains without prayer. In the beginning this happened, as I said, three or four times. It is something so very different that even if one has experienced only the prayer of quiet, I believe that one will understand by the effects which were mentioned in speaking of locutions. This false representation is something very obvious; if the soul does not want to be deceived, and it walks in humility and simplicity, I don't think it will be deceived. Anyone who has had a true vision from God can tell the false almost immediately, for, although this false vision begins with pleasure and delight, the soul hurls it from itself; and even the delight, I think, must be different -- it doesn't have the appearance of pure and chaste love. The devil very quickly shows who he is. So where there is experience, the devil, in my opinion, can do no harm.
11. That this vision from God could be the work of the imagination is the most impossible of impossible things; it is utter nonsense to think so, for the beauty and the whiteness of one hand alone is completely beyond our imagination. It's impossible to see in a moment, without thinking or ever having thought about them, things represented that in a long time could not have been put together by the imagination, because they go far beyond, as I said, what we can comprehend here on earth. And if we could imagine something of the vision, the difference could still be seen clearly by this other factor that I shall now mention. For if the vision were represented by means of the intellect, apart from the fact that it wouldn't produce any of the great effects that a true one produces, the soul would be left exhausted. Doing this would be like wanting to make oneself go to sleep and yet remaining awake because the sleep doesn't come. When people need sleep or feel a weakness in the head and desire sleep, they do what they can and at times it seems they are achieving something. But if it isn't true sleep that comes to them, they will not be sustained nor will they experience in their head a renewed feeling of strength; rather, they will feel more exhausted. Something similar would happen here; for if the intellect were to produce the vision, the soul would be left exhausted -- not sustained and strong, but tired and displeased. One cannot exaggerate the richness that the true vision leaves; it even gives health to the body and leaves it comforted.
12. I gave this reason along with others when they told me that the devil was the cause or that I had fancied the vision -- and this was often -- and I made comparisons as I could, and the Lord gave me understanding. But all of this proved to be of little avail. Since there were very holy persons in this place -- and compared to them I was a wretched person -- and God was not leading them by this path, they immediately became fearful. For it seems that because of my sins, my secrets and confidences, which they came to know of, were spread around, although I spoke to no one about them except to my confessor or anyone he told me to tell.
13. I told them once that if they were to tell me that a person whom I knew very well and with whom I had just finished speaking were not that person, but that I had imagined it, I would without doubt, as they knew, believe what they said rather than what I had seen. But if this person were to leave me some jewels, and they were left in my hands as tokens of great love, I would not believe what they said, even though I desired, because I hadn't had any jewels before and was poor, whereas now I found that I was rich. I was able to show them these jewels because all who knew me saw clearly that my soul was changed, and my confessor told me so. The difference in all things was very great; it was not feigned, but all could see it very clearly. I said that since I was previously so wretched I couldn't believe that if the devil did this to deceive me and bring me to hell he would have taken a means as contrary as was that of removing vices and bestowing virtues and fortitude. For I saw clearly that by these experiences I was at once changed.
14. Insofar as I know, my confessor, as I say -- who was a truly holy Father from the Society of Jesus -- gave this same reply. He was very discreet and deeply humble; and this humility that was so great brought upon me many trials. For since he was a learned and very prayerful man, and the Lord didn't lead him by this path, he didn't trust in himself. He suffered many great trials in many ways on my account. I knew that they told him to be careful of me, that he shouldn't let the devil deceive him by anything I told him; they brought up examples to him of other persons. All of this made me anxious. I feared that I would have no one who would hear my confession, but that all would run from me. I did nothing but weep.
15. By God's providence he wanted to continue to hear my confession, for he was such a great servant of God that he would have put up with anything for God; so he advised me that I shouldn't turn aside from what he told me or fear that he would fail me, and that I shouldn't offend God. He always encouraged and comforted me. He always ordered me not to hold anything from him. I never did. He told me that if I followed this advice the devil wouldn't be able to harm me even if the vision did come from him, but that rather the Lord would draw good out of the evil the devil desired to do my soul. This Father strove for my soul's perfection in every way he could. Since I had so much fear, I obeyed him in everything, although imperfectly; for on account of these trials he suffered a great deal during the three years or more that he was my confessor. In the great persecutions I suffered and in the many bad judgments the Lord allowed others to make of me -- and often without their being at fault -- everyone came to him, and he was blamed without any fault on his part.
16. It would have been impossible for him to suffer so much if he hadn't been so holy and the Lord hadn't encouraged him. He had to respond to those who thought I was going astray; and they didn't believe him. On the other hand he had to calm me and heal the fear I had by putting greater stress on the fear of offending God. He also had to assure me; for since in each vision there was something new, God permitted that I afterward be left with great fears. Everything happened to me because I was and had been such a sinner. This Father comforted me with great pity. If he would have trusted in himself more, I wouldn't have suffered so much; God gave him understanding of the truth in all things -- the very Sacrament itself enlightened him, I believe.
17. Those servants of God who were not so sure about me conversed with me often. Since I spoke carelessly about some things, they interpreted my intention differently and thought that what I said, without my being careful, as I say, showed little humility. (I loved one of them very much because my soul owed him an infinite debt and he was very holy; I felt it infinitely when I saw that he didn't understand me; he strongly desired that I might advance and that the Lord might give me light). Upon seeing some little fault in me -- for they saw many -- everything else was immediately condemned. They asked me some things; I answered plainly and carelessly. At once they supposed that I wanted to teach them and that I thought I was wise. It would all get back to my confessor, for certainly they desired my good; and he would again scold me.
18. This lasted for a long time, in which I was afflicted on all sides, although I was able to bear those trials by means of the favors the Lord was granting me. I say this so that it might be known what a great trial it is not to have someone who has experience of this spiritual path; if the Lord hadn't favored me so much, I don't know what would have happened to me. There were enough things to drive me insane, and sometimes I found myself in such straits that I didn't know what to do other than raise my eyes to the Lord. For the opposition of good men to a little woman, wretched, weak, and fearful like myself, seems to be nothing when described in so few words; yet among the very severe trials I suffered in my life, this was one of the most severe. Please the Lord that I may have served His Majesty somewhat through this trial. For I am very certain that those who accused and condemned me were serving Him, and that it was all for my greater good.

CHAPTER 29
 
Continues the topic begun and tells of some great favors the Lord granted her and of some things His Majesty told her for her own assurance and so that she could answer those who contradicted her.
 
1. I've wandered far from my topic because I was about to speak of the signs for discerning that the vision is not produced by the imagination. How could we represent in detail the humanity of Christ and imagine His great beauty? No little time would be required if the image were to look somewhat like Him. You could indeed represent Him in your imagination and gaze upon Him for some time, and upon His form and whiteness, and gradually perfect that image and commit it to memory. Who could take away such a image, since the intellect was able to fashion it? In the vision we are dealing with there is no possibility of fashioning it ourselves, but we must look at what the Lord desires to show us, when He desires, and as He desires. There is no taking it away or inducing it, nor, however much we try, is there any way of doing either; nor when we desire is there a way to see it or to stop seeing it. If we want to look at some particular thing, the vision of Christ ceases.
2. For two and a half years God frequently granted me this favor. It must be for over three years now that He has continually replaced this favor with another more sublime -- as I shall perhaps afterward explain. And in being aware that He was speaking to me and that I was beholding that great beauty and the gentleness with which He spoke those words with His most beautiful and divine mouth -- and at other times beholding His severity -- and strongly desiring to know the color of His eyes, or how tall he was, so that I could be able to describe these things, I never merited to see them. Nor was I able to obtain this knowledge; rather, by trying to do so, I would lose the vision entirely. Indeed I sometimes see Him looking at me with pity, but this kind of vision is so powerful that the soul cannot suffer it, and it remains in such a sublime rapture that in order to enjoy the beautiful vision more completely it loses it. Hence with respect to this vision there is nothing to desire or not to desire. It is clearly seen that the Lord desires nothing else than humility and confusion, and that we accept what is given and praise the one who gives it.
3. This is the case in all visions without exception; our effort can neither do nor undo anything when it comes to seeing more or seeing less. So that we may be made less capable of pride, the Lord desires us to be very clearly aware that this is not our work but His Majesty's work. Rather, it makes us humble and fearful when we observe that since the Lord takes away our power of seeing what we desire to see, He can take from us these favors and gifts -- and we shall be left with nothing. We should always walk in fear as long as we live in this exile.
4. The Lord almost always showed Himself to me as risen, also when He appeared in the Host -- except at times when He showed me His wounds in order to encourage me when I was suffering tribulation. Sometimes He appeared on the cross or in the garden, and a few times with the crown of thorns; sometimes He also appeared carrying the cross on account, as I say, of my needs and those of others. But His body was always glorified.
I suffered numerous affronts and trials in speaking about these visions, and very many persecutions. It seemed so certain to them that I had a devil that some persons wanted to exorcise me. This didn't matter much to me; but I grieved when I saw that my confessors were afraid to hear my confession or when I learned that others said something to them. Nonetheless, I was never able to regret having seen these heavenly visions, and I would not exchange even one for all the goods and delights of the world. I have always considered a vision a great favor from the Lord. It seems to me to be a most rich treasure, and the Lord Himself assured me of this many times. I saw that I was increasing very much in His love. I went to Him to complain about all these trials, and I always came away from prayer consoled and with new strength. I didn't dare contradict those who were judging my spirit, because I saw that everything would then become worse since my doing so would appear to them as a lack of humility. I talked with my confessor; he always consoled me greatly when he saw that I was troubled.
5. Since the visions were increasing, one from the group who previously helped me -- for he sometimes heard my confession when the ordinary confessor wasn't able to do so -- began to say that it was clearly the devil. He ordered that, since I didn't have the means to resist the visions, I should always bless myself when I saw one and make the gesture of scorn called the fig; he was certain the devil was the cause and that by my doing this the vision wouldn't return. He told me that I shouldn't be afraid, that God would protect me and take it away from me. Following this advice was very painful for me. Since I couldn't believe but that the vision was from God, it was a terrible thing for me to have to do what I was commanded; and neither could I desire, as I said, that the vision be taken away. But, finally, I did all they ordered me to do. I begged God persistently and with many tears that He would free me from deception. And I begged St. Peter and St. Paul; for since the first time the Lord appeared to me was on their feastday, He told me that they would protect me from being deceived. Thus I often saw them very clearly at my left, although not by an imaginative vision. These glorious saints were very much lords of mine.
6. Making the fig at this vision of the Lord caused me the greatest pain. When I saw Him present, I couldn't have believed it was the devil if they broke me in pieces; thus it was a kind of severe penance for me. So that I would not be forever blessing myself, I held a cross in my hand. I did this almost all the time; I didn't make the fig so continually, because it grieved me deeply to do so. I recalled the injuries the Jews caused Him and begged Him to pardon me since I was doing it in order to obey the one who stood in His place, and not to blame me, since they were the ministers that He had placed in His Church. He told me not to worry and that I did well in obeying, but that He would make the truth known. When they forbade me to practice prayer, it seemed to me He was annoyed. He told me to tell them that now what they were doing was tyranny. He gave me signs for knowing that the vision was not from the devil. I shall mention some afterward.
7. Once while I was holding the cross in my hand, for I had it on a rosary, He took it from me with His own hands; when He gave it back to me, it was made of four large stones incomparably more precious than diamonds -- there is no appropriate comparison for supernatural things. A diamond seems to be something counterfeit and imperfect when compared with the precious stones that are seen there. The representation of the five wounds was of very delicate workmanship. He told me that from then on I would see the cross in that way; and so it happened, for I didn't see the wood from which it was made but these stones. No one, however, saw this except me.
When I began to try to obey the command to reject and resist these favors, there was a much greater increase in them. In seeking to distract myself, I never got free from prayer. It even seemed to me that I was in prayer while sleeping. There was an increase of love and of the loving complaints I was addressing to the Lord; the pain became unbearable, nor was it in my power to stop thinking of Him no matter how much I tried and even though I wanted to. Nonetheless, I obeyed when I could; but in this matter I was able to do little or nothing at all, and the Lord never took prayer from me. But even though He told me to do what they said, He assured me on the other hand and taught me what I should say to them -- and so He does now. He gave me so many adequate reasons that these reasons made me feel completely secure.
8. After a short time His Majesty began as He had promised me to give further indication that it was He by increasing the love of God in me to such a degree that I didn't know where it came from (for it was very supernatural); nor did I procure it. I saw that I was dying with desire to see God, and I didn't know where to seek this life except in death. Some great impulses of this love came upon me in such a way that, even though they were not as unbearable as those I already mentioned before or of such value, I didn't know what to do with myself. For nothing satisfied me, nor could I put up with myself; it truly seemed as if my soul were being wrested from me. O superb contrivance of my Lord! What delicate skill You use with Your miserable slave! You hide Yourself from me and afflict me with Your love through a death so delightful that the soul would never want to escape from it.
9. It's impossible for anyone who has not experienced them to be able to understand these impulses, which are so vehement. For they are not a disquiet of the heart. Neither are they the certain devotional feelings that often occur and seem to suffocate the spirit because they can't be contained. These devotional feelings belong to a lower form of prayer and their impetuous stirrings should be avoided by trying gently to gather them within oneself and by quieting the soul. This condition is like that of children crying so furiously that it seems they are about to be suffocated; their excessive feelings cease when they are given something to drink. So it is here. Reason should bridle these feelings because they could be caused by our own natural weakness. We should consider with fear that they are not totally perfect but can pertain in great part to the sensory portion of the soul. And let this child become quiet by a loving caress which moves it to love, by gentle means and not by blows, as they say. Let this love be held within and not resemble the pot that heats up too fast and boils over because too much wood was put on the fire. They should moderate the causes of the increase of this fire and strive to put it out with gentle and not arduous tears; for such are the tears that come from these feelings, and these tears do much harm. I myself sometimes experienced them in the beginning, and they left my head so exhausted and my spirit so tired that for another day or more I was unfit to return to prayer. Hence great discretion is necessary in the beginning so that everything may proceed gently and the spirit may be shown how to work interiorly. One should strive earnestly to avoid exterior feelings.
10. These other impulses are far different. We ourselves don't put the wood on the fire, but it seems that once the fire is going we are suddenly thrown into it so as to be burned up. The soul doesn't strive for the pain of this wound caused by the Lord's absence, but at times an arrow is thrust into the deepest and most living recesses of the heart in such a way that the soul doesn't know what has happened or what it wants. It well understands that it wants God and that the arrow seems to have been dipped in a poisonous herb so that for the love of this Lord it might despise itself; and it would gladly lose its life for Him. You can't exaggerate or describe the way in which God wounds the soul and the extreme pain this wound produces, for it causes the soul to forget itself. Yet this pain is so delightful that there is no other pleasure in life that gives greater happiness. The soul would always want, as I said, to be dying of this sickness.
11. This pain and glory joined together left me confused; I couldn't understand how such a combination was possible. Oh, what it is to see a wounded soul! I say that this reality should be understood in such a way that the soul is said to be wounded for a very sublime reason and there be clear awareness that the soul did not cause this love, but that seemingly a spark from the very great love the Lord has for it suddenly fell upon it, making it burn all over. Oh, how many times when I am in this state do I recall that verse of David: Quemadmodum desiderat cervus ad fontes aquarum; for it seems to me that I experience it literally within myself.
12. When this thirst is not too severe, it seems it can be appeased somewhat; at least the soul seeks some remedy -- for it doesn't know what to do -- through certain penances, but they are no more felt and cause no more pain than would the shedding of blood from a dead body. It seeks ways and means of doing something about the love of God it feels. But this pain of love is so great that I don't know what bodily torment would take it away. Since the remedy doesn't lie in bodily penances, these penances make very poor medicine for so sublime a sickness. They can relieve it somewhat, and the soul can get along in this way while at the same time begging God to provide a cure for its sickness. But it sees no remedy other than death, for it thinks that by means of death it can enjoy its Good completely. At other times the pain becomes so severe that the soul can do neither penance nor anything else, for the whole body is paralyzed. One is unable to stir with either the feet or the arms. Rather, if one is standing, one sits down, like a person being carried from one place to another, unable even to breathe. The soul lets out some sighs -- not great ones -- because it can do no more; they are felt within.
13. The Lord wanted me while in this state to see sometimes the following vision: I saw close to me toward my left side an angel in bodily form. I don't usually see angels in bodily form except on rare occasions; although many times angels appear to me, but without my seeing them, as in the intellectual vision I spoke about before. This time, though, the Lord desired that I see the vision in the following way: the angel was not large but small; he was very beautiful, and his face was so aflame that he seemed to be one of those very sublime angels that appear to be all afire. They must belong to those they call the cherubim, for they didn't tell me their names. But I see clearly that in heaven there is so much difference between some angels and others and between these latter and still others that I wouldn't know how to explain it. I saw in his hands a large golden dart and at the end of the iron tip there appeared to be a little fire. It seemed to me this angel plunged the dart several times into my heart and that it reached deep within me. When he drew it out, I thought he was carrying off with him the deepest part of me; and he left me all on fire with great love of God. The pain was so great that it made me moan, and the sweetness this greatest pain caused me was so superabundant that there is no desire capable of taking it away; nor is the soul content with less then God. The pain is not bodily but spiritual, although the body doesn't fail to share in some of it, and even a great deal. The loving exchange that takes place between the soul and God is so sweet that I beg Him in goodness to give a taste of this love to anyone who thinks I am lying.
14. On the days this lasted I went about as though stupefied. I desired neither to see nor to speak, but to clasp my suffering close to me, for to me it was greater glory than all creation.
Sometimes it happened -- when the Lord desired -- that these raptures were so great that even though I was among people I couldn't resist them; to my deep affliction they began to be made public. After I experience them I don't feel this suffering so strongly; rather I experience what I mentioned before in that other part -- I don't recall which chapter -- which is very different in many respects and more valuable. But when this pain I'm now speaking of begins, it seems the Lord carries the soul away and places it in ecstasy; thus there is no room for pain or suffering, because joy soon enters in.
May He be blessed forever who grants so many favors to one who responds so poorly to gifts as great as these.
