CHAPTER 36
 
Continues the same subject. Tells how this monastery of the glorious St. Joseph was finally founded and of the strong opposition and persecution the nuns had to undergo after taking the habit. Tells also of the great trials and temptations she suffered and how the Lord brought her out of them all victoriously to His own praise and glory.
 
1. Once I left that city I journeyed very happily, determined to undergo most willingly everything the Lord desired. The very night I reached this city our patent and our brief for the monastery arrived from Rome. I was amazed, and, when they learned of the great need there was for my being here and of the coincidence the Lord had prepared for me, so too were those who knew how He made me come quickly. For I found here the bishop and the holy Friar Peter of Alcántara and another gentleman, a very good servant of God, in whose house this holy friar was staying; this gentleman was a person in whom the servants of God found protection as well as a welcome.
2. The two of them succeeded in getting the bishop to accept the monastery under his jurisdiction, which was no small thing since the house was to be poor. But the bishop was so fond of persons whom he saw determined to serve the Lord that he soon grew fond of showing it his favor. And because this holy old Friar Peter approved it and urged now some, now others, to help us, it was he who did everything. If I hadn't by coincidence come at this precise time -- as I already mentioned -- I don't know how the monastery could have been founded. For this saintly man was here only a little while (I don't believe as many as eight days); he was very sick during them, and shortly afterward the Lord brought him to Himself. It seems His Majesty preserved him until this matter was taken care of because for a long time -- I don't know if it exceeded two years -- he was very sick.
3. Everything was done in deep secrecy; if it hadn't been, nothing could have been accomplished since the people were opposed to the foundation, as became manifest afterward. The Lord ordained that my brother-in-law become ill; since his wife was not here and he was in such need, my superiors gave me permission to stay with him. With this excuse nothing became known, although some persons didn't fail to suspect something; yet they didn't believe their suspicions. It was an amazing thing that he wasn't any sicker than was necessary for the business to be taken care of. When there was need that he get well so that I could be free and that he could leave the house empty, the Lord immediately brought this about; at which my brother-in-law marvelled.
4. I had a lot of trouble with some persons at times -- and with others at other times -- that the monastery be accepted. I had trouble with my sick brother-in-law and with the workmen to get them to convert the house into a monastery and make it ready quickly, for there was still much to be done. Moreover, my companion was not here; it seemed to us we could better conceal what we were doing if she were absent. For many reasons I was taking care that everything be done in a hurry; one of the reasons for this was that I feared by the hour they would make me return to my own monastery. There were so many trying things that I wondered if this wasn't the cross; although it still seemed to me small in comparison with the great cross I learned from the Lord I would have to suffer.
5. When everything was ready the Lord was pleased that on St. Bartholomew's day the habit was received by some and the Blessed Sacrament was reserved, and with all due authority and power our monastery of our most glorious father St. Joseph was founded, in 1562. I, along with two other nuns from our house who happened to be outside, was present at this clothing. Since this house that was converted into a monastery was the one in which my brother-in-law lived (for, as I said, he was the one who bought it in order to keep the project a better secret), I was there with permission; and I hadn't done anything without getting advice from learned men so as not to go one iota against obedience. Since these learned men observed that for many reasons the monastery would be very beneficial for the whole order, they told me I could go ahead even though I did so secretly and was careful that my superiors not find out about it. If these learned men had told me an imperfection lay in what I was doing, no matter how small, I would have given up founding a thousand monasteries, how much more one. This is certain, for although I desired to withdraw more from everything and live my profession and vocation with greater perfection and enclosure, I desired this in such a way that if I had found out it would have been of greater service to the Lord to abandon the project, I would have done so with complete peace and calm, as I did the other time.
6. Well, with me it was like being in glory to see the Blessed Sacrament reserved and that four poor orphans (for they didn't bring any dowry) and four great servants of God (for this is what I had in mind from the beginning, that persons would enter who by their example of prayer and a very perfect life would be a foundation upon which we could achieve our goal) would give each other support; and to see a work accomplished that I knew was for the service of the Lord and to the honor of the habit of His glorious Mother -- for these were my concerns. It also consoled me to have done what the Lord had so often given me the command to do; that there was another church in this city, dedicated to my glorious father St. Joseph, in whose honor none was yet built. But this consolation didn't come because it seemed to me that I myself did anything to bring about this new foundation. To me it never seemed that I did anything, nor does it now. I always know that the Lord did it, and what I did for my part I did with so many imperfections that I rather find there was a reason to blame myself than be pleased with myself. But it was a great delight for me to see that His Majesty had used me -- who am so wretched -- as an instrument for such a marvelous work. Thus I was so intensely happy that I was as though outside myself, in deep prayer.
7. After all was over and about three or four hours had passed, the devil stirred up within me a spiritual battle, as I shall now describe. He brought doubts to my mind about whether what I had done was wrong; whether I had gone against obedience in having made the foundation without my provincial's orders. For it indeed seemed to me the provincial would be somewhat displeased because the house was under the jurisdiction of the Ordinary and for my not having told him first; although, since he had not wanted to give permission and I myself had not changed my obedience, it also seemed to me that on the other hand he wouldn't care at all. And there were doubts as to whether those who lived here would be happy with so much austerity. What if they lacked food? Wasn't it all foolishness? Who got me involved in all this since I already had a monastery to live in? All that the Lord had commanded me, and the great deal of advice, and the prayers that for more than two years had gone on almost without cease, all was erased from my memory as though it had never been. I only remembered my own decisions. And all the virtues, and my faith, were then suspended within me without my having the strength to activate any of them or defend myself against so many blows.
8. The devil raised doubts in me also about how I wanted to shut myself up in so austere a house, and with my many illnesses. How would I be able to endure so much penance and leave a monastery that was large and pleasant and where I had always been so happy? And how could I leave so many friends, for perhaps those in the new house would not be to my liking? I had obligated myself to a great deal; perhaps I would despair. The devil by chance may have intended to take away my peace and quiet so that on account of such disturbance I wouldn't be able to pray and thus would lose my soul.
Thoughts of this sort, all mixed together, he put before my mind; I was powerless to think of anything else. This state was accompanied by an affliction and obscurity and darkness of soul that I wouldn't know how to exaggerate. Finding myself in such a condition, I made a visit to the Blessed Sacrament; although I couldn't pray. It seems to me the anguish I experienced was like that of someone in the death agony. I didn't dare speak of it to anyone, for I still didn't have a designated confessor.
9. Oh, God help me, what a miserable life this is! There's no secure happiness, nor anything that doesn't change. A short time before it seemed to me I wouldn't change my happiness with anyone on earth, and now the very reason for this happiness tormented me in such a way that I didn't know what to do with myself. Oh, if we would carefully observe the affairs of our life! Each one would see through experience the little of either happiness or unhappiness we ought to have on their account.
Certainly, I think, it was one of the most difficult periods in my life. It seems my spirit anticipated the many things I had yet to pass through, although they weren't as severe as this suffering would have been should it have lasted. But the Lord did not let His poor servant suffer long, for never did He fail to succor me in my tribulations. And He did so in my present one, for He gave me a little light to enable me to see it was the devil and to understand the truth that it was all due to the devil's desire to frighten me with lies. As a result I began to recall my strong resolutions to serve the Lord and my desires to suffer for Him. I reflected that if I were to fulfill these desires I couldn't go about seeking rest; and that if I had trials, they would be meritorious; and if unhappiness, it would serve as purgatory if I accepted it in the service of God; and I had nothing to fear, for since I desired trials, these troubles were good; that the greater the opposition the greater the gain. And why did I lack courage to serve one whom I owed so much?
With these and other reflections, drawing up all my strength, I promised before the Blessed Sacrament to do all I could to obtain permission to come to live in this house, and to make a promise of enclosure when able to do it in good conscience.
10. Once I did this the devil fled instantly and left me calm and happy; and I remained so, and have remained so always. All the enclosure and penance and other things that are observed in this house are extremely easy for me and amount to little. The happiness is so very great I sometimes wonder what I could choose on earth that would be more pleasant for me. I don't know if these observances are the reason for my having better health than ever, or whether the Lord -- since it is necessary and right that I do as everyone else -- wants to give me this consolation of being able to keep them, even though with difficulty. But all those persons who know about my illnesses marvel at this power. May He be blessed who gives all things and in whose power all things can be done!
11. I was left truly exhausted from such a conflict, and I laughed to myself at the devil, for I saw clearly it was he. I believe the Lord permitted this conflict because I had never known what it was to be unhappy with being a nun (not for even a moment during the twenty-eight years or more that I was one), and that I might know the great favor He had thereby granted me and the torment He had freed me from; and also so that if I should meet someone who was unhappy I wouldn't be surprised but feel compassion for her and know how to console her.
Once this conflict was over, after dinner, I wanted to rest a little since I had hardly slept the whole night, nor had I been without work or worry some of the other nights; and all the days had been truly tiring. But since what was done became known in my monastery, and there arose in the city a great outcry for the reasons I mentioned, which seemed to bear some weight, the prioress sent me an order to return to my monastery at once. On seeing her orders I left my nuns, who were very saddened, and returned immediately. I saw clearly that many trials would be awaiting me, but since the house was already established, I didn't worry much. I prayed to the Lord to protect me and to my father St. Joseph to bring me to his house, and I offered God what I would have to undergo. I was very happy about the coming opportunity to suffer for Him and be able to serve Him, for I believed they would immediately throw me into the prison cell. But I thought this would make me very happy since I wouldn't have to speak to anyone and would be able to rest a little in solitude, for which I had a real need because I was worn out from so much dealing with people.
12. When I arrived and gave an account to my prioress, she was somewhat placated. They sent everything to the provincial and the case was left up to him. When he came, I went before him very happy to know I was suffering something for the Lord because in this case I didn't find I had committed any offense either against His Majesty or against the order. Rather, I was trying with all my strength to bring our order increase, and I would have eagerly died for it since my whole desire was that our order fulfill its mission perfectly. I recalled the judgment pronounced on Christ and saw how it amounted to nothing at all, I accused myself of the fault as one who was very much to blame, and this seemed true to anyone who didn't know all the reasons. After having received a serious reprimand, although not one as severe as the transgression deserved or in accordance with what many told the provincial, I didn't want to excuse myself; I had been determined about what I did. Rather, I begged to be pardoned and punished and that he not be vexed with me.
13. I saw clearly that in some matters they condemned me without any fault on my part, for they said I did it so as to be esteemed or to become famous and other similar things. But in other matters I knew plainly they were speaking the truth, in saying that I was worse than others, in asking how, since I hadn't kept the strict religious observance of that house, I thought I could keep it in another stricter one, and in asserting that I gave scandal to the people and was promoting novelties. None of what they said caused me any disturbance or grief, although I let on that it did so as not to give the impression I didn't take to heart what they said to me. Finally the provincial ordered me to go before the nuns and give my account, and I had to do it.
14. Since I felt interiorly calm and the Lord helped me, I gave my explanation in such a way that neither the provincial nor those who were present found anything to condemn me for. Afterward I spoke to him more freely, and he was very satisfied and promised -- if all went well -- to give me permission to go there once the city quieted down, for the clamor throughout the whole city was vehement, as I shall now describe.
15. After two or three days some of the councilmen as well as the mayor and the city council gathered in a meeting and unanimously stated they could by no means give consent, that to do so would bring notable harm to the republic, and that the Blessed Sacrament should be removed and the foundation should not in any way be allowed to continue. They ordered a meeting of all religious orders to be carried out in such a way that each could give its opinion through two learned spokesmen. Some of the spokesmen were silent, others condemned the new foundation. Finally they concluded that it should be suppressed at once. Only one member, a presentado of the order of St. Dominic, although he was opposed (not to the monastery, but to its being poor), said it wasn't something that had to be suppressed, that the matter should be considered carefully, that there was time for this, that such a decision pertained to the bishop -- or other things of this nature. What he said was very helpful for they were so furious that it was a wonder they didn't carry out their decision right away. What happened, finally, was that the foundation had to continue in existence, for the Lord was pleased with it; and all of them together could do little against His will. They gave their reasons and were rightfully zealous; so, without offending God, they made me suffer as well as all the persons who were in favor of it (for there were some in its favor); and these persons underwent much persecution.
16. The uproar among the people was such that they talked of nothing else, and they were all condemning me and appealing to the provincial and to my monastery. I felt no more pain over what they said about me than if they hadn't said it, yet I was fearful the new house would be suppressed. This caused me great disturbance, as did also the realization that the persons who helped me were losing their credibility and suffering great trial; for what others said against me, I think, made me rejoice. If I had had a little faith, I wouldn't have experienced any disturbance; but a certain lack in one of the virtues is enough to put them all to sleep. So, I was very afflicted for the two days in which these meetings, I mentioned, among the people took place. And while I was feeling really desolate, the Lord said to me: "Don't you know that I am mighty? What do you fear?" And He assured me the new monastery would not be suppressed. As a result I was left very consoled. They sent an official denunciation to the royal council. The reply that came asked for an account of how the new monastery was founded.
17. As a result a long lawsuit began; the city sent its delegates to the royal council, and some persons had to go to represent the new monastery. But I had no money, nor did I know what to do. The Lord so provided that my provincial never ordered me to give up my involvement in the project. The provincial is so well disposed to everything virtuous that, even though he gave no actual help, he didn't want to oppose the foundation. He didn't give me permission to come here until he saw what the outcome of the lawsuit would be. These servants of God were alone; and they did more through their prayers than I did through my negotiations, although these negotiations required much effort.
Sometimes it seemed that everything was failing, especially one day before the provincial came when the prioress gave me the order not to have anything more to do with the new monastery; this meant abandoning everything. I went to God and told Him: "Lord, this house is not mine; it was founded for You; now that there is no one to take care of its affairs, You, Your Majesty, must do so." I remained as at ease and undisturbed as I would have if the whole world had been taking care of the business for me, and I immediately felt it was in safe hands.
18. A very good servant of God, a priest, who always helped me and was eager about everything regarding perfection, went to the royal council to take part in the negotiations and worked very hard. And that saintly gentlemen, whom I mentioned, did a great deal in this matter and helped in every way. He suffered a lot of trials and persecution, and always in everything I esteemed him as a father and still do now. The Lord gave so much fervor to those who helped us that each one considered the matter to be as much a part of them as it would if their life and honor depended on it, and they didn't think of it as anything else than something by which the Lord was served. It seemed clear that His Majesty helped the master I mentioned, that cleric who was also one of those who helped me a great deal and whom the bishop made his representative in a large meeting that was held. He stood alone against everyone and finally appeased them by suggesting certain procedures through which time was gained; but none of the procedures was sufficient to keep them from soon returning to the question of suppressing the foundation as though its suppression were a matter of life and death, as the saying goes. This servant of God I'm speaking of officiated at the clothing ceremony and reserved the Blessed Sacrament in the new monastery; he was the victim of much persecution. This assault lasted almost half a year; to tell in detail the great trials they suffered would take a long time.
19. I was startled by what the devil stirred up against a few poor little woman and how everyone thought -- I mean those opposed -- that this house would be so harmful to the city. There were only twelve women and the prioress (for there were to be no more); and they were living such a strict life. If the house were harmful or a mistake, it would be so for these women; but that it would be harmful to the city didn't make sense. But the adversaries found so many reasons for opposing it that they did so in good conscience. Finally they came to agree that if it had an income they would pass over the matter and let the foundation continue. I was already so wearied of seeing the hardships of all those who were helping me, more so than in seeing my own, that it didn't seem to be a bad idea to have an income until our adversaries quieted down, and then give it up afterward. At other times, wretched and imperfect as I am, I thought that perhaps the Lord wanted this since we couldn't succeed without it; I was disposed to accept the compromise.
20. While I was in prayer the night before this matter was to be discussed, and I had already begun to agree, the Lord told me not to agree, that if in the beginning we accepted an income they wouldn't allow us afterward to renounce it, as well as some other things. That same night the holy Friar Peter of Alcántara appeared to me, for he was already dead. And before he died he had written to me -- since he had known about the strong opposition and persecution we were undergoing, -- that he rejoiced the foundation was being so vehemently opposed, that that was a sign the Lord would be very much served in this monastery in that the devil was interfering so much to prevent it, and that I should in no way decide to receive an income. And in the letter he urged me as much as two or three times not to accept an income, and that if I followed this advice everything would come about as I desired. I had already, two or three times since his death, seen him and the great glory he possessed; so I wasn't frightened. Rather I rejoiced greatly, for he always appeared in his glorified body, filled with great glory; it gave me a powerful feeling of glory to see him. I recall that the first time I saw him he told me, among other things, about how sublime his joy was and how the penance he had performed brought him fortune in that he had gained such a reward.
21. Since I believe I already said something about these apparitions, I'm not saying any more than that this time he looked severe and told me only that I should by no means accept an income and asked why I didn't want to take his advice, and disappeared immediately. I was startled, and the next day I at once told the gentleman -- for he was the one to whom I had recourse in everything since he was the most involved in the project -- what took place and that he should by no means agree to an income, but that the lawsuit should go forward. He was much more convinced about this than I, and very happy. Later he told me how reluctantly he had agreed with the compromise.
22. Afterward, when the negotiations were on their way toward a settlement, another person, a very zealous servant of God came to me saying the matter should be put into the hands of learned men. As a result I had many worries. Some of those who were helping me agreed with this proposal; this snarl in the affairs, which was caused by the devil, turned out to be the most complicated tangle of all. The Lord helped me in everything, for in a summary like this you can't explain all that took place in the two years from the time this house was founded to the time the litigation ended. This last phase and the first were the most laborious.
23. Well, once the city was placated, the Dominican Father Presentado managed to be a great help to us even though he wasn't present. But the Lord had brought him at a time very opportune for us, and it seemed His Majesty brought him here solely for this purpose because this Father told me afterward that he had not had any reason to come, but had learned of our need by accident. His presence was what was needed. After he had departed again, he tried in several ways to get our Father Provincial to give me and some others with me permission to come to this house to recite the Divine Office and teach it to those who were here, for it seemed almost impossible that the provincial would give it so quickly. The day that we came was one of greatest consolation for me.
24. Before entering the new monastery, while in prayer outside in the church, being almost in rapture, I saw Christ who seemed to be receiving me with great love and placing a crown on my head and thanking me for what I did for His Mother.
Another time while all were at prayer in choir after compline, I saw our Lady in the greatest glory clothed in a white mantle; it seemed she was sheltering us all under it. I understood how high a degree of glory the Lord would give to those living in this house.
25. Once the liturgical Offices were initiated the people began to grow very devoted to this house. More nuns were accepted, and the Lord started to inspire our most vigorous persecutors to show us much favor; and they gave us alms. So they approved of what they had so greatly disapproved. Little by little they abandoned the lawsuit and said that now they knew the house was a work of God since in spite of so much opposition His Majesty desired the foundation to go forward. And there isn't anyone at present who doesn't think it was right to let the house be founded. Thus they are so careful about providing us with alms that, without our asking or begging from anyone, the Lord stirs them to send alms to us. We get along without any lack of necessities, and I hope in the Lord things will always be like this. Since the nuns are few in number, if they do what they are obliged to, as His Majesty now gives them the grace to do, I am sure they won't lack anything or have need to be anxious or to importune anyone. The Lord will take care of them as He has up to now.
26. It is the most wonderful consolation for me to be able to live with souls so detached. Their conversation is about how they can make progress in the service of God. Solitude is their comfort, and the thought of seeing others (when doing so is not a help toward an enkindling within them of a greater love of their Spouse) is a burden to them even though these others may be relatives. As a result no one comes to this house save those who speak about this love, for otherwise neither are the nuns satisfied nor are their visitors. Their language allows them to speak only of God, and so they only understand one who speaks the same language; nor would they in turn be understood by anyone who doesn't. We observed the rule of our Lady of Mt. Carmel and keep it without mitigation as ordained by the Friar Cardinal Hugo of Saint Sabina and given in 1248, in the fifth year of the pontificate of Pope Innocent IV.
27. It seems to me that all the trials suffered were well worth it. Now, although there is some austerity because meat is never eaten without necessity and there is an eight-month fast and other things, as are seen in the first rule, this is still in many respects considered small by the Sisters; and they have other observances which seemed to us necessary in order to observe the rule with greater perfection. I hope in the Lord that what has been begun will prosper, as His Majesty has told me it would.
28. The other house that the beata I mentioned was trying to found was also favored by the Lord. It was established in Alcalá, and there was no lack of strong opposition to her; nor did she fail to suffer great trials. I know that full religious observance is kept there in conformity with this rule of ours. May it please the Lord that all be to His glory and praise and to that of the glorious Virgin Mary, whose habit we wear, amen.
29. I believe your Reverence will be annoyed by the long account I've given of this monastery, but it is very short in comparison with the many trials we suffered and the wonders the Lord has worked for it. There are many witnesses who are able to swear to these marvels, and so I beg your Reverence for the love of God that if you think you should tear up what else is written here you preserve whatever pertains to this monastery. And when I'm dead, give it to the Sisters who live here that when those who are to come see the many things His Majesty arranged for its establishment by means of so wretched and dreadful a thing as myself they might be greatly encouraged to serve God and strive that what has been begun may not collapse but always flourish.
Since the Lord has desired so particularly to show His favor toward the establishment of this house, it seems to me that one would be doing a great wrong and would be punished by God were one to begin to mitigate the way of perfection that the Lord has initiated here and so favored that it can be borne with such great ease; it is very clearly seen to be bearable and can be carried out calmly. The main disposition required for always living in this calm is the desire to rejoice solely in Christ, one's Spouse. This is what they must always have as their aim: to be alone with Him alone. And there should be no more than thirteen in the house, for after much advice I have learned that this is a fitting number; and I've also found it out through experience. To live the spiritual life as we do, as well as from alms, without begging, does not allow for a larger number. Let them always have greater trust in the one who through many trials and the prayer of many persons strove for what would be better. And by the great happiness and joy and small amount of hardship we have had during these years spent in this house, in which we find that all of us have had much better health than usual, it is obvious that this number is what is fitting. Those who think the life harsh should blame their own lack of spirituality and not what is observed here, for they should be able to live it since persons who are sickly or have delicate health live it with such ease; they should go to another monastery where they can be saved in a way conformable to their own spirituality.

CHAPTER 37
 
Discusses the effects of a certain favor the Lord granted her. Some very good doctrine accompanies this discussion. Tells how one should strive for a greater degree of glory, and esteem it highly, and that we shouldn't neglect everlasting goods for any difficulty.
 
1. It is hard for me to say more than I've already said about the favors the Lord has granted me, and it is already too much for anyone to believe that He granted them to so dreadful a person. But to obey the Lord, who commanded me to do so, and your Reverences, I will say something to give Him glory. May it please His Majesty that some soul may benefit by seeing that the Lord has desired to favor a thing so miserable. (What will He grant to one who has truly served Him?) May all be encouraged to please His Majesty since even in this life He bestows tokens like these of His love.
2. First, it must be understood that in these favors the Lord grants to the soul there can be either more or less glory. For in some visions the glory, delight, and consolation so surpass what is given in others that I am amazed the difference in rejoicing can be so great, even in this life. The difference in a delight and favor God gives in a vision or rapture can be so great that it seems impossible that there could be anything more to desire here below, and so the soul doesn't desire or ask for any more happiness. Since the time the Lord showed me how great the difference is in heaven between the joy of some and the joy of others, I have seen clearly that also here on earth the Lord has no measure in giving when He is pleased to do so. Thus I wouldn't want to use any measure in my service of His Majesty and in employing all my life and strength and health to this end. I wouldn't want to lose through my own fault as much as one tiny particle of greater glory. So I say that if I were to be asked which I prefer, either to bear all the trials of the world until its end and afterward ascend to a little more glory or without any trials to descend to a little bit less, I would very eagerly choose all the trials for a little more of rejoicing in the knowledge of God's grandeurs; I see that whoever understands Him more loves and praises Him more.
3. I don't say that were I even in the lowest place in heaven I wouldn't be very happy and consider myself very fortunate to be there. Since I have deserved the lowest place in hell, the Lord would be showing me great mercy in bringing me to heaven; may it please His Majesty that I go there and that He not look upon my great sins. What I am saying is that if I could and if the Lord gave me the grace to work hard, I wouldn't want to lose anything through my own fault even if avoiding the loss were at a very great cost to myself. How wretched I am, for with so many sins I had lost everything!
4. It is also noteworthy that in every favor the Lord granted me, whether visions or revelation, my soul gained something; through some visions it gained a great deal. The vision of Christ left upon me an impression of His most extraordinary beauty, and the impression remains today; one time is sufficient to make this imprint. How much deeper it becomes as the Lord grants this favor more often! The benefit I received was most advantageous, and this is what it consisted of: I had a serious fault that did me much harm; it was that when I began to know that certain persons like me, and I found them attractive, I became so attached that my memory was bound strongly by the thought of them. There was no intention to offend God, but I was happy to see these persons and think about them and about the good things I saw in them. This was something so harmful it was leading my soul seriously astray. After I beheld the extraordinary beauty of the Lord, I didn't see anyone who in comparison with Him seemed to attract me or occupy my thoughts. By turning my gaze just a little inward to behold the image I have in my soul, I obtained such freedom in this respect that everything I see here below seems loathsome when compared to the excelling and beautiful qualities I beheld in this Lord. There is no knowledge or any kind of gift that I think could amount to anything when placed alongside of what it is to hear just one word spoken from that divine mouth; how much more so when the words are so many. I hold that it would be impossible for me (provided the Lord would not permit that, on account of my sins, this impression be erased from my memory) to be so occupied with the thought of anyone that I couldn't free myself from it by only a slight effort to remember this Lord.
5. I experienced this freedom in the case of one of my confessors. Since I believe that my confessors stand so truly in the place of God, I think they are the ones for whom I feel the most benevolence. Since I am always very fond of those who guide my soul and since I felt secure, I showed them that I liked them. They, as God-fearing servants of the Lord, were afraid lest in any way I would become attached and bound to this love, even though in a holy way, and they showed me their displeasure. This happened after I became so subject to obeying them, for before that I didn't experience this love. I laughed to myself to see how mistaken they were, although I didn't always express so clearly how little attached I was to anyone. But I assured them; and as they got to know me better they realized what I owed to the Lord, for these suspicions they had about me always came at the beginning of our acquaintance.
A much greater love for and confidence in this Lord began to develop in me when I saw Him as one with whom I could converse so continually. I saw that He was man, even though He was God; that He wasn't surprised by human weaknesses; that He understands our miserable make-up, subject to many falls on account of the first sin which He came to repair. I can speak with Him as with a friend, even though He is Lord. I know that He isn't like those we have as lords here on earth, all of whose lordship consists in artificial displays: they have to have designated times for speaking and designated persons to whom they speak. If some poor little creature has any business matter to take up, what roundabout ways they must go through and what trials and favors it costs them in order to get to speak to this lord! Oh, and if it is with the king! Then, people who are poor or those who don't belong to the nobility can't even get near; but they must ask those who are the court minions. And most assuredly these latter are not persons who have trampled the world underfoot, for those who have, speak the truth since they know no fear, nor are they obligated to anyone. Such people are not for the palace, for there you mustn't speak out but be silent about what appears to be wrong; you mustn't even dare think about it if you don't want to fall into disfavor.
6. O King of Glory and Lord of all kings! How true that Your kingdom is not armed with trifles, since it has no end! How true that there is no need for intermediaries with You! Upon beholding Your person one sees immediately that You alone, on account of the majesty You reveal, merit to be called Lord. There's no need for people in waiting or for guards in order that one know that You are King. Here on earth, if a king were all by himself, he would fail to be recognized. However much he would want to be recognized as king, he wouldn't be believed; he would have no more to show than anyone else. It's necessary that one see the reason for believing he is a king, and that is the purpose of these artificial displays. If he didn't have them, no one would esteem him at all; the appearance of power doesn't come from him. It is from others that his display of grandeur must come.
O my Lord! O my King! Who now would know how to represent Your majesty! It's impossible not to see that You in Yourself are a great Emperor, for to behold Your majesty is startling; and the more one beholds along with this majesty, Lord, Your humility and the love You show to someone like myself the more startling it becomes. Nevertheless, we can converse and speak with You as we like, once the first fright and fear in beholding Your majesty passes; although the fear of offending You becomes greater. But the fear is not one of punishment, for this punishment is considered nothing in comparison with losing You.
7. These are the benefits deriving from this vision, besides other great ones it leaves in the soul. If the vision is from God it is known through its effects -- when the soul is in light. Since the Lord often, as I mentioned, wants it to be in darkness and not see this light, it is not surprising that one as wretched as I be afraid. It happened just now that for eight days it seemed there wasn't any knowledge in me -- nor could I acquire any -- of what I owed God, or any remembrance of His favors; my soul was in a terrible stupor and in I don't know what kind of condition, nor do I know how it got that way. It wasn't having bad thoughts, but it was so incapable of good thoughts that I laughed at myself. It pleased me to see the weakness of a soul when God is not always working in it. I saw clearly that in this state the soul is not without Him, for this trial is not like the great ones I mentioned I sometimes have. But even though the soul puts wood on the fire and does this little it can do of itself, the fire of love does not burn. It is through His great mercy that it sees at least the smoke so as to know that the fire is not entirely dead. The Lord returns to rekindle it. For even though a soul breaks its head in arranging the wood and blowing on the fire, it seems that everything it does only smothers the fire more. I believe the best thing for it to do is to surrender itself completely to the fact that of itself it can do nothing and to become occupied, as I said, in some other meritorious works. For perhaps the Lord removes the prayer so that it might undertake these works and come to know through experience how little it can do by itself.
8. Indeed, I took delight in the Lord today and dared to complain of His Majesty, and I said to Him: "How is it, my God, that it's not enough that You keep me in this miserable life and that for love of You I undergo it and desire to live where everything hinders the enjoyment of You, in that I have to eat and sleep and carry on business and talk with everyone (and I suffer all for love of You, as You well know, my Lord, because it's the greatest torment for me); how is it that when there is so little time left over to enjoy Your presence You hide from me? How is this compatible with Your mercy? How can the love You bear me allow this? I believe, Lord, that if it were possible for me to hide from You as it is for You to hide from me that the love You have for me would not suffer it; but You are with me and see me always. Don't tolerate this, my Lord! I implore You to see that it is injurious to one who loves You so much."
9. These and other things it occurred to me to say, while understanding first how lenient the punishment reserved for me in hell was in comparison with the place I deserved. But sometimes love becomes so foolish I don't make sense; with my whole mind I make these complaints, and the Lord puts up with it all. May so good a King be praised! We wouldn't dare say these things to earthly kings! Yet I'm not surprised that one doesn't dare speak to the king or to his representatives, for there is reason for fear. The world is such that we would have to have longer lives -- if some part of our lives is going to be spent in serving God -- to learn all the nice points and new rules and practices of etiquette. I bless myself when I observe what is going on. The fact is that when I entered this monastery of St. Joseph I still didn't know how to live. It's no laughing matter when there is some carelessness in dealing with people who deserve much more. They, indeed, take it as such an affront that it becomes necessary to show proof of your good intentions, if there is, as I say, some carelessness; even then please God they will believe you.
10. I repeat that indeed I didn't know how to live. Here is a poor tired soul: it sees how they command her to keep her thoughts always on God and they insist it is necessary to do this in order to free oneself from many dangers; on the other hand it sees it mustn't miss any fine points in the world's rules of etiquette lest it become an occasion of temptation to those whose reputations are based on these details. These rules weary me, and I was never done excusing myself, because I couldn't help -- even though I studied the matter -- but to make many mistakes. For, as I say, in the world these mistakes are not taken lightly. And is it true that religious who should be held excused in these matters are in fact excused? No, it is not; it is said that monasteries must be schools of etiquette and that these things should be known. I for one certainly cannot understand this. I have thought that some saint said the monastery should be a school for the instruction of those wanting to be courtiers in heaven -- and this has all been understood backward. It is right for anyone who cares about heaven to have a continual solicitude about pleasing God and despising the world. It is beyond me how anyone can have so much concern about pleasing those who live in the world by means such as these, which are so changeable. If you could learn the rules once and for all, you could let the matter pass. But just for the titles of address on a letter there's need for a university chair, so to speak, to lecture on how it's to be done. For sometimes you have to leave a margin on this side of the page, sometimes on the other; and someone who's not usually addressed as magnifico must be then addressed as illustrious.
11. I don't know how it's all going to end up; even though I'm not yet fifty, I've already seen so many changes I don't even know how to live anymore. What will they do who are now being born and will live for many years? I surely pity spiritual people who are obliged for certain holy reasons to live in the world; it is a terrible cross they must bear with all these rules of etiquette. If you could reach an agreement with everyone and become ignorant in this science and desire that others consider you to be so, you would be freed from a lot of troubles.
12. But what foolishness I've got into! Wanting to speak of God's grandeur, I've ended up speaking about petty worldly things. Since the Lord has granted me the favor to abandon this world, I want to go forth from it. Let those who love such trivial things attend to them. Please God that in the next life, which will be without change, we shall not have to pay for this. Amen.

CHAPTER 38
 
Deals with some great favors the Lord granted her by showing her certain heavenly secrets, and with other great visions and revelations that His Majesty wanted her to see. Tells of the effects they had on her and of the great profit her soul derived from them.
 
1. One night, being so ill that I wanted to excuse myself from mental prayer, I took my rosary in order to occupy myself in vocal prayer. I tried not to recollect my intellect, even though externally I was recollected in the oratory. When the Lord desires, these devices are of little avail. I was doing this for only a short while when a spiritual rapture came upon me so forcefully that I had no power to resist it. It seemed to me I was brought into heaven, and the first persons I saw there were my father and mother. I saw things so marvelous -- in as short a time as it takes to recite a Hail Mary -- that I indeed remained outside myself; the experience seemed to me too great a favor. I say it lasted a short time, but perhaps it took a little longer; the impression is that the time was very short. I feared lest the experience be some illusion, although it didn't seem so to me. I didn't know what to do, because I was very ashamed to go to my confessor about this. I don't think the shame was from humility, but I thought he would make fun of me and say: Oh, what a St. Paul you are, or a St. Jerome, that you see heavenly things! And that these glorious saints experienced similar things made me more afraid. I did nothing but weep a great deal, for I didn't think there was any basis for my having such an experience. Finally, however much I disliked doing so, I went to my confessor; I never dared to remain silent about such things -- however much I regretted having to speak of them -- on account of the great fear I had of being deceived. Since he saw I was so anxious, he consoled me very much and said many kind things in order to free me from my troubled feelings.
2. As time went on, it happened -- and continues to happen sometimes -- that the Lord showed me greater secrets. There is no way in which the soul can see more than what is manifested, nor is this possible; so my soul never saw more than what the Lord wanted to show it each time. What He revealed was so great that the least part of it would have been sufficient to leave me marveling and very proficient in considering and judging all the things of life as little. I should like to be able to explain something about the least of what I came to know; and in thinking about how this can be done, I find that it is impossible. In just the difference between the light we see and the one represented there, although all is light, there is no comparison; next to that light the sun's brilliance seems to be something very blurred. In sum, the imagination, however keen it may be, cannot paint or sketch what this light is like, or any of the things the Lord gave me knowledge of. He bestows along with this knowledge a delight so sublime as to be indescribable, for all the senses rejoice to such a high degree and in such sweetness that the delight cannot be exaggerated -- so it's better not to say any more.
3. Once, for more than an hour, since it doesn't seem to me that He left my side, the Lord was showing me admirable things in this way. He said to me: "See, daughter, what those who are against me lose; don't neglect to tell them." Ah, my Lord, if Your Majesty doesn't give them light, what little benefit will what I say bring to those whose deeds blind them! Some persons to whom You have given light will profit from knowing about Your grandeurs; but I don't think anyone who sees they are revealed to someone as dreadful and wretched as myself will believe me. May Your name and mercy be blessed, because at least in myself I have seen a recognizable improvement. Afterward I wanted to remain in this state always and not return to everyday living, for the contempt that was left in me for everything earthly was great; these things all seemed to me like dung, and I see how basely we are occupied, those of us who are detained by earthly things.
4. Once, when I was with that lady I mentioned, I was ill with heart sickness; as I said my heart trouble was severe, although it isn't now. Since she was very charitable, she gave orders that I be shown some of her jewels of gold and precious stone that were very valuable, especially one of the diamonds that was appraised highly. She thought they would make me happy. Recalling what the Lord has kept for us, I was laughing to myself and feeling pity at the sight of what people esteem. And I thought of how impossible it would be for me, even if I tried, to esteem those things if the Lord didn't remove from my memory the things He had shown me. In this way the soul has great dominion, so great that I don't know whether anyone who doesn't possess this dominion will understand it. It is the detachment proper and natural to us because it comes without labor on our part. God does it all, for His Majesty shows these truths in such a way, and they are so imprinted in the soul, that it is seen clearly we couldn't acquire them by ourselves in this way and in so short a time.
5. Likewise, little fear of death, which I always feared greatly remained. Now death seems to me to be the easiest thing for anyone who serves God, for in a moment the soul finds it is freed from this prison and brought to rest. I think these raptures in which God carries away the spirit and reveals to it such excellent things are like the departure of the soul from the body, for in an instant these good things are seen all together. Let us omit any word about the pains suffered when the soul and body are torn from each other, for little attention should be paid to them. And the death of those who truly love God and have despised the things of this life must be more gentle.
6. These revelations also helped me very much, I think, in coming to know our true country and realizing that we are pilgrims here below; it is a wonderful thing to see what is there and know where we shall live. For if someone has to go to live permanently in another country, it is a great help to them in undergoing the struggle of the journey to have seen that it is a land where they will be very much at ease. These revelations are also a great help for reflecting on heavenly things and striving that our conversation be there; these things are done with ease. Doing them is very beneficial; merely to look toward heaven recollects the soul, for since the Lord desired to reveal something of what is there, the soul concentrates on it. It happens to me sometimes that those who I know live there are my companions and the ones in whom I find comfort; it seems to me that they are the ones who are truly alive and that those who live here on earth are so dead that not even the whole world, I think, affords me company, especially when I experience those impulses.
7. Everything I see with my bodily eyes seems to be a dream and a mockery. What I have already seen with the eyes of my soul is what I desire; and since it is seen as something far away, this life is a death. In sum, the favor the Lord grants to whomever He gives visions like these is extraordinary. They are a great help, especially in bearing a heavy cross; since nothing satisfies the soul, everything causes displeasure. And if the Lord didn't allow that sometimes the favor be forgotten, even though it again come to mind, I don't know how one could live. May He be blessed and praised forever and ever! May it please His Majesty, by the blood of His Son shed for me, since He has desired that I understand something of so many great blessings and in some way begin to enjoy them, that what happened to Lucifer, who through his own fault lost everything, may not happen to me. May He because of who He is not allow it, for I have no small fear sometimes; although, on the other hand, and very habitually, God's mercy makes me feel safe. Since he has freed me from so many sins, He will not want to let me out of His hands to go astray. This I beg your Reverence always to beg of Him.
8. The favors mentioned are not as great, in my opinion, as the one I shall now speak of, and this for many reasons and on account of the great blessings and remarkable fortitude of soul it left in me; although each favor when looked at in itself is so great it is beyond comparisons.
9. One day on the vigil of Pentecost I went to a secluded spot after Mass where I often prayed, and I began to read about this feast in a volume by the Carthusian. Reading of the signs beginners, proficients, and the perfect must have in order to recognize whether the Holy Spirit is with them, it seemed to me that by the goodness of God and insofar as I could make out He was not failing to be with me. I praised Him and remembered that once before when I read the passage I really lacked everything; I had realized this very clearly, just as now I understood the opposite about myself. So I knew that what the Lord had granted me was a great favor. Thus I began to consider the place I had merited in hell on account of my sins, and I gave much praise to God because it didn't seem I recognized my soul by the change I saw. While I was reflecting on this, a great impulse came upon me without my understanding the reason. It seemed my soul wanted to leave my body because it didn't fit there nor could it wait for so great a good. The impulse was so extreme I couldn't help myself, and it was, in my opinion, different from previous impulses; nor did my soul know what had happened, nor what it wanted, so stirred up was it. Although I was seated, I tried to lean against the wall because my natural power was completely gone.
10. While in this state I saw a dove over my head. It was very different from doves on earth since it didn't have earthly feathers, but the wings had little shells that gave off great brilliance. It was larger than a dove. It seemed to me I heard the noise it made with its wings. It fluttered about for the space of a Hail Mary. My soul was already in such a condition that in losing itself it lost sight of the dove. The spirit was quieted by so good a guest; for, in my opinion, a marvelous favor like this should have frightened and disturbed it. And when it began to enjoy the guest, the fear was taken away and the joyous quietude began while the soul continued in rapture.
11. The glory of this rapture was extraordinary. I remained for the rest of Pentecost so stupefied and stunned I didn't know what to do with myself, or how I had the capacity for so great a favor and gift. I neither heard nor saw, so to speak, but experienced wonderful interior joy. I noted from that day the greatest improvement in myself brought about by a more sublime love of God and much stronger virtues. May He be blessed and praised forever, amen.
12. One other time, I saw the same dove over the head of a Dominican Father, except that I think the rays and splendor of the same wings extended much further. It was made known to me that he would draws souls to God.
13. At another time I saw our Lady placing a very white mantle on the presentado, from this Dominican order, of whom I have sometimes spoken. She told me that, because of the service he had rendered her in helping toward the foundation of this house, she gave him that mantle as a sign that she would keep his soul spotless from then on and that he would not fall into mortal sin. I am certain that so it was. For a few years later he died, and his death and the life he lived were so penitential, and the death was so holy, that insofar as one can know there is no reason for doubt. A friar who was present at his death told me that before this dying Father expired he told this friar about how St. Thomas was with him. He died with great joy and desire to leave this exile. Afterward he at times appeared to me in resplendent glory and told me some things. His prayer had reached such a degree that at the time of his death when he wanted to avoid mental prayer because of his great weakness, he couldn't on account of his many raptures. He wrote to me a little before he died asking what he should do, because when he finished saying Mass he often went into rapture without being able to prevent it. God in the end rewarded him for the great service he had rendered Him throughout his whole life.
14. I saw some of the wonderful favors the Lord bestowed on the rector of the Society of Jesus whom I have mentioned at times. So as not to make this too long I will not put them down here. Once a severe trial came upon him in which he was very persecuted and found himself in deep affliction. One day, while I was hearing Mass, at the elevation of the host, I saw Christ on the cross. He spoke some words of consolation that I was to tell this rector and some other words foretelling what was to come and reminding the rector of what Christ suffered for him and announcing that he should prepare himself to suffer. This gave the rector great consolation and courage, and everything came about afterward as the Lord had told me.
15. I saw great things concerning members of the order (of the whole order together) that this Father belonged to, that is, of the Society of Jesus. I saw them in heaven, sometimes with white banners in their hands, and, as I say, other very admirable things about them. Thus I hold this order in great veneration, for I've had many dealings with them and I see that their lives are in conformity with what the Lord has made known to me about them.
16. One night while I was in prayer the Lord began to speak some words by which he made me remember how bad my life had been, and these words filled me with shame and grief. Although they were not severe, they caused consuming sorrow and pain. More improvement in self-knowledge is felt from one of these words than would be got from many days of reflection on our wretchedness, for it engraves on us an undeniable truth. He brought before me the extremely vain friendships I had had and told me I should esteem highly the fact that a will that had been as bodily occupied as mine should desire to be fixed on Him, and that He would accept it.
At other times He told me I should recall the time when, it seems, I considered it an honor to go against His will. Again, that I should remember what I owed Him, that when I was giving Him the hardest blow, He was granting me favors. If I have some faults, which are not few, His Majesty gives me an understanding of them that, it seems, reduces me to nothing; and since I have many, this happens often. It happened to me that, after having been reprimanded by my confessor, I desired to find consolation in prayer; and found there the true reprimand.
17. To return, then, to what I was saying; since the Lord had begun to recall to me my wretched life and since I hadn't done anything, in my opinion, I wondered, in the midst of tears, if He desired to grant me some favor. It ordinarily happens when I receive some favor from the Lord that I am first humbled within myself so that I might see more clearly how far I am from deserving favors; I think the Lord must do this. After a short while my spirit was so enraptured it seemed to me to be almost entirely out of the body -- at least the spirit isn't aware that it is living in the body. I saw the most sacred humanity with more extraordinary glory than I had ever seen. It was made manifest to me through a knowledge admirable and clear that the humanity was taken into the bosom of the Father. I wouldn't know how to describe the nature of this, because, without my seeing anything, it seemed to me I was in the presence of the Divinity. My amazement was such that I think for several days I couldn't return to myself; and it always seemed to me that I went about in the presence of that majesty of the Son of God, although the experience wasn't the same as when it first happened. This I understood clearly, but the vision is so strongly engraved on the imagination that no matter how short a while it lasts the impression left cannot be removed for some time; and the impression is very consoling and beneficial.
18. I saw this same vision three other times. It is in my opinion the most sublime vision the Lord granted me the favor of seeing, and it bears along with it marvelous benefits. It seems it purifies the soul in an extraordinary way and removes almost entirely the strength of this sensitive part of our nature. It is a great flame that seems to burn away and annihilate all of life's desires. For even though, glory to God, I didn't have any desires for vain things, it was made clear to me in this experience how everything was vanity. How vain, how truly vain are the lordships of earth! It is a powerful lesson for raising one's desires to pure truth. There is impressed upon one a reverence I wouldn't know how to speak of; for it is very different from the kind we can acquire here on earth. Great fear is caused in the soul when it sees how it dared, or how anyone can dare, to offend so extraordinary a majesty.
19. I have sometimes mentioned these effects of visions as well as other things about them, and I have already said that the benefit can be greater or less. The benefit coming from this vision is extremely great. When I approached to receive Communion and recalled that extraordinary majesty I had seen and considered that it was present in the Blessed Sacrament (the Lord often desires that I behold it in the host), my hair stood on end; the whole experience seemed to annihilate me. O my Lord! If You did not hide Your grandeur, who would approach so often a union of something so dirty and miserable with such great majesty! May the angels and all creatures praise You, for You so measure things in accordance with our weakness that when we rejoice in Your sovereign favors Your great power does not so frighten us that, as weak and wretched people, we would not dare enjoy them.
20. What once happened to a peasant could happen to us, and I know that this really happened. He found a treasure that was worth more than his lowly frame of mind was capable of handling, and the possession of it caused such sadness to come upon him that, from pure affliction and worry over not knowing what to do with the treasure, he gradually died. If he hadn't found it all at once, but if it had been given to him little by little in order to sustain him, since he was poor, he would have lived more happily and it wouldn't have cost him his life.
21. O Wealth of the poor, how admirably You know how to sustain souls! And without their seeing such great wealth, You show it to them little by little. When I behold majesty as extraordinary as this concealed in something as small as the host, it happens afterward that I marvel at wisdom so wonderful, and I fail to know how the Lord gives me the courage or strength to approach Him. If He who has granted, and still does grant me so many favors, did not give this strength, it would be impossible to conceal the fact or resist shouting aloud about marvels so great. For what will a wretched person, like myself, who is weighed down with abominations and who has wasted her life with so little fear of God, feel when she sees she is approaching this Lord of such powerful majesty and that this Lord desires that the soul behold it? How will a mouth that has spoken so many words against this very Lord be united with that most glorious body, which abounds in purity and compassion? For the love that face shows, so beautiful in its tenderness and affability, makes the soul much more sorrowful and afflicted for not having served Him than does the majesty it beholds in Him cause it to fear. But how could I have experienced twice what I saw and am about to describe?
22. Certainly, my Lord and my glory, I am about to say that in some way in these great afflictions my soul feels I have done something in Your service. Alas! I don't know what I'm saying to myself, because almost without my uttering this I'm already putting it down in writing. I find I'm disturbed and somewhat outside myself since I have brought these things back to mind. If this sentiment had come from me, I might truly have said that I had done something for You, my Lord; but since there can be no good thought if You do not give it, there's no reason to be thankful to myself. I am the debtor, Lord, and You the offended one.
23. Once, while approaching to receive Communion, I saw with my soul's eyes more clearly than with my bodily eyes two devils whose appearance was abominable. It seems to me their horns were wrapped around the poor priest's throat, and in the host that was going to be given to me I saw my Lord with the majesty I mentioned placed in the priest's hands, which were clearly seen to be His offender's; and I understood that that soul was in mortal sin. What would it be, my Lord, to see Your beauty in the midst of such abominable figures? They were as though frightened and terrified in Your presence, for it seems they would have very eagerly fled had You allowed them. This vision caused me such great disturbance I don't know how I was able to receive Communion, and I was left with a great fear, thinking that if the vision had been from God, His Majesty would not have permitted me to see the evil that was in that soul. The Lord Himself told me to pray for him and that He had permitted it so that I might understand the power of the words of consecration and how God does not fail to be present, however evil the priest who recites them, and that I might see His great goodness since He places Himself in those hands of His enemy, and all out of love for me and for everyone. I understand well how much more priests are obliged to be good than are others, how deplorable a thing it is to receive this most Blessed Sacrament unworthily, and how much the devil is lord over the soul in mortal sin. It did me a great deal of good and brought me deep understanding of what I owed God. May He be blessed forever and ever.
24. At another time something else happened to me that frightened me very much. I was at a place where a certain person died who for many years had lived a wicked life, from what I knew. But he had been sick for two years, and in some things it seems he had made amends. He died without confession, but nevertheless it didn't seem to me he would be condemned. While the body was being wrapped in its shroud, I saw many devils take that body; and it seemed they were playing with it and punishing it. This terrified me, for with large hooks they were dragging it from one devil to the other. Since I saw it buried with the honor and ceremonies accorded to all, I reflected on the goodness of God, how He did not want that soul to be defamed, but wanted the fact that it was His enemy to be concealed.
25. I was half stupefied from what I had seen. During the whole ceremony I didn't see another devil. Afterward when they put the body in the grave, there was such a multitude of them inside ready to take it that I was frantic at the sight of it, and there was need for no small amount of courage to conceal this. I reflected on what they would do to the soul when they had such dominion over the unfortunate body. May it please the Lord that what I have seen -- a thing so frightful! -- will be seen by all those who are in such an evil state; I think it would prove a powerful help toward their living a good life. All of this gives me greater knowledge of what I owe God and of what he freed me from. I was very frightened until I spoke about it to my confessor, wondering if it was an illusion caused by the devil to defame that soul, although it wasn't considered to be the soul of someone with a very deep Christian spirit. Truly since the vision was not an illusion, it frightens me every time I think of it.
26. Now that I have begun to speak of some visions of the dead, I want to mention certain happenings in which the Lord in this regard was pleased that I see some souls. I shall mention only a few so as to be brief and because knowing about them isn't necessary; I mean for anyone's benefit.
I was told that someone who had been our provincial was dead (although when he died he was in another province). I had had some dealings with him and was indebted to him for some good deeds. He was a person of many virtues. As soon as I learned he was dead, I felt much disturbance because I feared for his salvation in that he had been a superior for twenty years. Being a superior is something I am indeed very afraid of since I think having souls in one's charge involves a lot of danger; with much anxiety I went to an oratory. I offered up for him all the good I had done in my life, which must in fact amount to little, and so I asked the Lord to supply from His own merits what was necessary for that soul to be freed from purgatory.
27. While beseeching the Lord for this as best I could, it seemed to me that person came out from the depths of the earth at my right side and that I saw him ascend to heaven with the greatest happiness. He had been well advanced in years, but I saw him as only about thirty, or even less I think, and his countenance was resplendent. This vision passed very quickly; but I was so extremely consoled that his death could never cause me any more sorrow, although I saw persons who were filled with grief over his loss since he had been generally highly esteemed. The consolation my soul experienced was so great I couldn't worry about him, nor could I doubt that it was a vision; I mean that it was not an illusion. No more than fifteen days had passed since his death. However, I didn't neglect to get others to pray for him and to pray myself, except that I couldn't do so with the eagerness I would have if I hadn't seen this vision. When the Lord shows some persons to me in this way and afterward I desire to pray for them to His Majesty, it seems to me, without my being able to help it, that doing so is like giving alms to the rich. Afterward I learned -- for he died quite far from here -- of the death the Lord had given him; it was so greatly edifying, because of the knowledge, tears, and humility with which he died, that it left everyone amazed.
28. One of the nuns in the house who had been a great servant of God had been dead a little more than a day and a half. A nun was reciting a reading in the choir from the Office of the dead, which was being said for the departed soul, and I was standing so as to recite the verse with her. When she was half through the reading, I saw the nun who had died; it seemed to me her soul had come out at my right side just as in the previous case and was going to heaven. This was not an imaginative vision as was the former one, but like the others I mentioned; yet this kind is as certain as the imaginative visions.
29. Eighteen or twenty years ago another nun died in the house I was in. She had always been sick and been a very good servant of God, devoted to her choir duties and most virtuous. I thought certainly she would not enter purgatory, because the illnesses she had suffered were many, and that she would have a surplus of merits. Four hours after her death, while reciting the hours of the Office before her burial, I understood she departed from purgatory and went to heaven.
30. While at a college of the Society of Jesus, experiencing the great trials in soul and body I said I sometimes go through, I was in such a state that I think I wasn't even able to receive a good thought. That night a Brother from the Society died in that house, and while I was praying for him as I could and hearing Mass said for him by another Father of the Society, a deep recollection came over me; I saw him ascend to heaven in great glory, and the Lord along with him. By special favor I understood that it was His Majesty going with him.
31. Another friar of our order, a truly very good friar, was seriously ill; while I was at Mass, I became recollected and saw that he was dead and that he ascended to heaven without entering purgatory. He died at the hour I saw him, according to what I learned later. I was amazed he hadn't entered purgatory. I understood that since he was a friar who had observed his vows well the bulls of the order about not entering purgatory were beneficial to him. I don't know why I came to understand this. It seems to me it must have been because being a friar doesn't consist in the habit -- I mean in wearing it -- but in enjoying the state of higher perfection, which is what it means to be a friar.
32. I don't want to say anything more about these things, for as I have said there's no reason for my doing so -- although there are many things the Lord has granted me the favor of seeing. But of all that I've seen, I haven't known any soul that did not enter purgatory, with the exception of the soul of this Father and that of holy Friar Peter of Alcántara and the Dominican Father I mentioned. In the case of some, the Lord was pleased that I behold the degrees of glory they possess, and he showed me the places assigned to them. Great is the difference that lies between the glory of some and that of others.
