1. On Palm Sunday after Communion, my faculties remained in such deep suspension that I couldn't even swallow the host; and, holding it in my mouth, after I returned a little to myself, it truly seemed to me that my entire mouth was filled with blood. I felt that my face and all the rest of me was also covered with this blood, as though the Lord had just then finished shedding it. It seemed to me warm, and the sweetness I then experienced was extraordinary. The Lord said to me: "Daughter, I want my blood to be beneficial to you, and don't be afraid that My mercy will fail you. I shed it with many sufferings, and you enjoy it with the great delight you are aware of; I repay you well for the banquet you prepare me this day."
He said this because for more than thirty years I have received Communion on this day when possible and have striven to prepare my soul to give hospitality to the Lord. For it seemed to me cruel of the Jews, after having given Him such an enthusiastic reception, to have let Him go so far away to eat; and I imagined I invited Him to remain with me, which was very bad lodging for Him, as I now see. Thus I made some foolish reflections. The Lord must have accepted them, because this is one of the visions I hold to be very certain; and so the Communion was beneficial to me.
2. Previous to this, I believe for three days, I underwent that great suffering I bear, sometimes more than at other times, of being separated from God. During these days it had been very great, for it seemed I couldn't endure it. Having been in such anguish, I saw one evening that it was too late to eat supper, and so I was unable to do so. (Because of the vomitings it made me very weak not to have my supper earlier). Thus with great effort I put the bread in front of me so as to force myself to eat it. At once Christ appeared there, and it seemed to me He broke the bread and was about to place it in my mouth when He said: "Eat, daughter, and bear up as best you can. What you suffer grieves me, but it suits you now."
That suffering was taken away and I was consoled, for it truly seemed that He was with me, and throughout the next day as well. By this experience the desire for His presence was at that time satisfied.
The words "grieves me" made me stop to think because it doesn't seem to me He can be sorrowful over anything any more.
