1. One day, after the feast of St. Matthew, being in the state I'm usually in since I've seen the vision of the Blessed Trinity and how it dwells in a soul in the state of grace, a very clear understanding of this mystery was granted to me so that in certain ways and through comparisons I beheld it in an imaginative vision. Although at other times knowledge of the Blessed Trinity was given me through an intellectual vision, the truth, after a few days, no longer remained with me so that I could think about it and find consolation in it, as I can now. And now I realize that in a similar way I had heard about this truth from learned men but didn't understand it as I do at present, although I always believed it without hesitation because I have never had temptations against the faith.
2. To us ignorant people it appears that all three Persons of the Blessed Trinity are -- as represented in paintings -- in one Person, as when three faces are painted on one body. And thus we are so scared away that it seems the mystery is impossible and that no one should dare think about it. For the intellect feels hindered and fears lest it might have doubts about this truth, and it thereby loses something very beneficial.
3. What was represented to me were three distinct Persons, for we can behold and speak to each one. Afterward I reflected that only the Son took human flesh, through which this truth of the Trinity was seen. These Persons love, communicate with, and know each other. Well, if each one is by Himself, how is it that we say all three are one essence, and believe it? And this is a very great truth for which I would die a thousand deaths. In all three Persons there is no more than one will, one power, and one dominion, in such a way that one cannot do anything without the others. But no matter how many creatures there are, there is only one Creator. Could the Son create an ant without the Father? No, for it is all one power, and the same goes for the Holy Spirit; thus there is only one all-powerful God and all three Persons are one Majesty. Could one love the Father without loving the Son and the Holy Spirit? No, but anyone who pleases one of these three Persons, please all three, and the same goes for anyone who might offend one. Could the Father exist without the Son or without the Holy Spirit? No, because the essence is one; and where one is, all three are, for they cannot be separated. Well, how do we see that the three Persons are separate, and how did the Son take on human flesh and not the Father or the Holy Spirit? This I haven't understood. The theologians know. I know well that in that work so marvelous all three were present, and I don't get involved in thinking a lot about this. I immediately conclude my reflection with the observation that God is all-powerful and that whatever He wanted to do He did, and thus He will be able to do all he desires. And when I understand less, I believe more; and this belief gives me greater devotion. May He be blessed forever. Amen.
