CHAPTER 1
 
The reason I founded this monastery with such strict observance.
 
1. When I began to take the first steps toward founding this monastery (for the reasons given in the book I mentioned that I wrote and also because of some great favors from the Lord through which I learned that He would be greatly served in this house), it was not my intention that there be so much external austerity or that the house have no income; on the contrary, I would have desired the possibility that nothing be lacking. In sum, my intention was the intention of the weak and wretched person that I am -- although I did have some good motives besides those involving my own comfort.
2. At that time news reached me of the harm being done in France and of the havoc the Lutherans had caused and how much this miserable sect was growing. The news distressed me greatly, and, as though I could do something or were something, I cried to the Lord and begged Him that I might remedy so much evil. It seemed to me that I would have given a thousand lives to save one soul out of the many that were being lost there. I realized I was a woman and wretched and incapable of doing any of the useful things I desired to do in the service of the Lord. All my longing was and still is that since He has so many enemies and so few friends that these few friends be good ones. As a result I resolved to do the little that was in my power; that is, to follow the evangelical counsels as perfectly as I could and strive that these few persons who live here do the same. I did this trusting in the great goodness of God, who never fails to help anyone who is determined to give up everything for Him. My trust was that if these Sisters matched the ideal my desires had set for them, my faults would not have much strength in the midst of so many virtues; and I could thereby please the Lord in some way. Since we would all be occupied in prayer for those who are the defenders of the Church and for preachers and for learned men who protect her from attack, we could help as much as possible this Lord of mine who is so roughly treated by those for whom He has done so much good; it seems these traitors would want Him to be crucified again and that He have no place to lay His head.
3. O my Redeemer, my heart cannot bear these thoughts without becoming terribly grieved. What is the matter with Christians nowadays? Must it always be those who owe You the most who afflict You? Those for whom You performed the greatest works, those You have chosen for Your friends, with whom You walk and commune by means of Your sacraments? Aren't they satisfied with the torments You have suffered for them?
4. Indeed, my Lord, one who withdraws from the world nowadays is not doing anything. Since the world so little appreciates You, what do we expect? Do we perhaps deserve to be treated better? Have we perhaps done better toward those in the world that they would keep us in their friendship? What is this? What do we now expect, those of us who through the goodness of the Lord are freed of that contagious, scabby sore, that sect whose followers already belong to the devil? Indeed, they have won punishment with their own hands and have easily earned eternal fire with their pleasures. That's their worry! Still, my heart breaks to see how many souls are lost. Though I can't grieve so much over the evil already done -- that is irreparable -- I would not want to see more of them lost each day.
5. O my Sisters in Christ, help me beg these things of the Lord. This is why He has gathered you together here. This is your vocation. These must be the business matters you're engaged in. These must be the things you desire, the things you weep about; these must be the objects of your petitions -- not, my Sisters, the business matters of the world. For I laugh at and am even distressed about the things they come here to ask us to pray for: to ask His Majesty for wealth and money -- and this is done by persons who I wish would ask Him for the grace to trample everything underfoot. They are well intentioned, and in the end we pray for their intentions because of their devotion -- although for myself I don't think the Lord ever hears me when I pray for these things. The world is all in flames; they want to sentence Christ again, so to speak, since they raise a thousand false witnesses against Him; they want to ravage His Church -- and are we to waste time asking for things that if God were to give them we'd have one soul less in heaven? No, my Sisters, this is not the time to be discussing with God matters that have little importance.
6. Indeed, were I not to consider the human weakness that is consoled by receiving help in time of need (and it is good that we help insofar as we can), I'd be happy only if people understood that these are not the things they should be begging God for with so much care.

CHAPTER 2
 
Treats of how one should not worry about bodily needs and of the blessing there is in poverty.
 
1. Don't think, my Sisters, that because you do not strive to please those who are in the world you will lack food. I assure you that such will not be the case. Never seek sustenance through human schemes, for you will die of hunger -- and rightly so. Your eyes on your Spouse! He will sustain you. Once He is pleased, those least devoted to you will give you food even though they may not want to, as you have seen through experience. If in following this advice you should die of hunger, blessed be the nuns of St. Joseph's! For the love of the Lord, do not forget this. Since you have given up an income, give up worry about food. If you don't, everything will be lost. God wants some to have an income, and in their case it's all right for them to worry about their income since that goes with their vocation; but for us to worry, Sisters, would be absurd.
2. Worry about financial resources of others, it seems to me, would amount to thinking about what others are enjoying. Indeed, your worry won't make the other change his thinking, nor will it inspire him with the idea to give alms. Leave this worrying to the One who can move all, for He is the Lord of money and of those who earn money. By His command we came here. His words are true; they cannot fail; rather, heaven and earth will fail. Let us not fail Him; do not fear that He will fail you. And if some time He should fail you, it will be for a greater good. The lives of the saints failed when they were killed because of the Lord, but this happened so that through martyrdom their glory would be increased. It would be a good exchange to give up everything for the enjoyment of everlasting abundance.
3. Sisters, what I am saying is so important that I want you to remember it after my death -- and that's why I'm leaving it for you in writing -- for while I live I will remind you of it. I have seen by experience the great gain that comes from not worrying about such things. The less there is the more carefree I become. The Lord knows that, in my opinion, it distresses me more when we have a large surplus than when we are in need. I don't know if this is because I've experienced that the Lord immediately gives what we need. For us to worry about money would amount to deceiving the world, making ourselves poor in an exterior way but not being poor in spirit. I would feel scrupulous, so to speak, and it would seem to me as though a rich person were begging alms. Please God such may not be the case, for where there are too many cares about whether others will give us alms, sooner or later these cares will become habitual; or it could happen that we would go asking for what we have no need of, perhaps from someone more needy than we ourselves. Although those who give to us cannot lose anything but only gain, we would be losing. No, please God, my daughters! If you should start worrying like this, I would prefer that you have an income.
4. I beg you for the love of God and as an alms to me, in no way let your thoughts be taken up with these cares. If at any time such cares should be present in this house, let the youngest Sister cry out to His Majesty and bring the matter to the attention of the prioress. She may humbly tell the prioress that the latter is mistaken, and so mistaken that little by little true poverty will be lost. I hope in the Lord that this will never happen and that He will not abandon His servants. May this book you have asked me to write, even if it does no more, serve to awaken you in these matters.
5. Believe me, my daughters, that for your good the Lord has given me a little understanding of the blessings that lie in holy poverty. Those who experience them will understand, though perhaps not as much as I. For not only had I failed to be poor in spirit, even though I professed it, but I was foolish in spirit. Poverty of spirit is a good that includes within itself all the good things of the world. [And I believe it has many of the good things contained in all the virtues. I am not saying this for certain, because I don't know the worth of each virtue. I will not speak about what in my opinion I do not understand well. But, for myself, I hold that poverty of spirit embraces many of the virtues.] In it lies great dominion. I say that it gives once again to one who doesn't care about the world's good things dominion over them all. What do kings and lords matter to me if I don't want their riches, or don't care to please them if in order to do so I would have to displease God in even the smallest thing? Nor what do I care about their honors if I have understood that the greatest honor of a poor person lies in the fact of his being truly poor?
6. In my opinion honor and money almost always go together; anyone who wants honor doesn't despise money, and anyone who despises money doesn't care much about honor. Let this be clearly understood, for it seems to me that the desire for honor always brings with it some interest in money or income. It would be a wonder if any poor person were honored in the world; on the contrary, even though he may be worthy of honor, he is little esteemed. True poverty brings with it overwhelming honor. Poverty that is chosen for God alone has no need of pleasing anyone but Him. It is certain that in having need of no one a person has many friends. I have become clearly aware of this through experience.
7. So much is written about this virtue that I wouldn't know how to understand it all or still less speak of it. And so in order not to do an injustice to this virtue by trying to praise it, I will say no more. I have only spoken of what I have seen through experience, and I confess that until now I have been so absorbed in speaking of these things that I did not realize I was doing so. But since I have written this, for the love of the Lord, keep in mind that holy poverty is our insignia and a virtue which at the beginning, when our order was founded, was so esteemed and well kept by our holy fathers. For I have been told, by someone who knows, that they did not keep anything for the next day. If exteriorly we do not carry out this practice so perfectly, let us strive to do so interiorly. Life lasts but a couple of hours; exceedingly great will be the reward. If we should do nothing else but what the Lord counseled us to do, the pay of just being able in some way to imitate Him would be great.
8. These are the insignia that must be on our coat of arms, for we must desire to observe poverty in every way: in houses, clothing, words, and most of all in thought. As long as you do this, have no fear that the religious life in this house will fail; God will help. As St. Clare said, great walls are those of poverty. She said that it was with walls like these, and those of humility, that she wanted to enclose her monasteries. Surely, if poverty is truly observed, recollection and all the other virtues will be much better fortified than with very sumptuous buildings. Be careful of buildings like these; I beg you for the love of God and by His precious blood. And if I can say this in good conscience, may such a building fall to the ground the day you construct one.
9. It looks very bad, my daughters, if large houses are built with money from the poor. May God not allow it. The houses must be poor and small in every way. Let us in some manner resemble our King, who had no house but the stable in Bethlehem where He was born and the cross where He died. These were houses where there was little room for recreation. Those who build large ones know what they are doing; they have other holy intentions. But for thirteen poor little women, any corner should be enough. If it is necessary because of the extremely secluded life you live to have a stretch of land (and this even helps prayer and devotion) with some hermitages where you can withdraw to pray, well and good. But no buildings, or large and ornate house. God deliver us from them! Always remember that everything will come tumbling down on the day of judgment. Who knows whether this will come soon?
10. Now it would not be right for the house of thirteen poor little women to make a loud crash when it falls; the truly poor must make no noise. They must be noiseless people so that others will take pity on them. And how they will rejoice when they see someone who was freed from hell because of the alms he gave them! That's all possible because they are much obliged to pray continually for the souls of their benefactors, since their food comes from them. The Lord also desires that, even though it comes from Him, we show gratitude to those persons through whose means He gives this food to us. Do not be negligent about showing gratitude.
11. I don't know what I began to say, for I have wandered off the subject. I believe the Lord wanted me to do so, for I never thought about saying what I have said here. May His Majesty always help us so that we never fail in the practice of poverty, amen.

CHAPTER 3
 
Continues the subject she began to discuss in the first chapter; she urges her Sisters always to busy themselves begging God to help those who labor for the Church. The chapter ends with an earnest plea.
 
1. To return to the main reason the Lord brought us together in this house and why I have greatly desired that we live so as to please His Majesty, I want to speak of helping to remedy the great evils I have seen. Human forces are not sufficient to stop the spread of this fire caused by these heretics, even though people have tried to see if with the force of arms they could remedy all the evil that is making such progress. It has seemed to me that what is necessary is a different approach, the approach of a lord when in time of war his land is overrun with enemies and he finds himself restricted on all sides. He withdraws to a city that he has well fortified and from there sometimes strikes his foe. Those who are in the city, being chosen people, are such that they can do more by themselves than many cowardly soldiers can. And often victory is won in this way. At least, even though victory is not won, these chosen people are not conquered. For since they have no traitor, they cannot be conquered -- unless through starvation. In this example the starvation cannot be such as to force them to surrender -- to die, yes; but not to surrender.
2. But why have I said this? So that you understand, my Sisters, that what we must ask God is that in this little castle where there are already good Christians not one of us will go over to the enemy and that God will make the captains of this castle or city, who are the preachers and theologians, very advanced in the way of the Lord. Since most of them belong to religious orders, ask God that they advance very far in the perfection of religious life and their vocation; this is most necessary. For as I have said, it is the ecclesiastical, not the secular arm that will save us. Since in neither the ecclesiastical nor the secular arm can we be of any help to our King, let us strive to be the kind of persons whose prayers can be useful in helping those servants of God who through much toil have strengthened themselves with learning and a good life and have labored so as now to help the Lord.
3. You may perhaps ask why I am stressing this so much, and saying that we must help those who are better than we ourselves are. I will tell you why: it is because I don't think that as yet you understand well how much you owe the Lord for bringing you here where you are so removed from business affairs, occasions of sin, and worldly occupations. Indeed, it is a very great mercy. As for those persons I mentioned, who are not free in this way, it is good that they are not free; more so in these times than in the past. They are the persons who must strengthen people who are weak, and encourage the little ones. A fine state things would be in -- soldiers without captains! These persons must live among men, deal with men, live in palaces, and even sometimes outwardly behave as such men do. Do you think, my daughters, that little is required for them to deal with the world, live in the world, engage in its business, and, as I said, resemble it in its conversation, while interiorly remaining its strangers, its enemies; in sum, not being men but angels? For if they do not live in this way, they do not deserve to be called captains; nor may the Lord allow them to leave their cells, for they will do more harm than good. This is not the time for seeing imperfections in those who must teach.
4. And if they are not interiorly fortified through an understanding of the importance of trampling everything underfoot, of detachment from things that come to an end, and of attachment to eternal things, they will show some sign of this lack no matter how much they try to conceal it. Is it not the world they have to deal with? Have no fear that the world will forgive this deficiency; nor is there any imperfection it fails to recognize. It will overlook many good things and perhaps not even consider them good; but have no fear that it will overlook any evil or imperfect things. Now I wonder who it is that teaches people in the world about perfection, not so much that these people might seek perfection (for it doesn't seem to them they have any obligation to do this, but they think they are doing enough if they keep the commandments reasonably well), but that they might condemn others. And at times what is virtuous seems to them luxury. So, then, do not think that little help from God is necessary for this great battle these preachers and theologians are fighting; a very great deal is necessary.
5. I beg you to strive to be such that we might merit from God two things: First, that among the numerous learned men and religious there be many who will meet these requirements I mentioned that are necessary for this battle, and that the Lord may prepare those who do not meet them; one who is perfect will do much more than many who are not. Second, that after being placed in this combat, which, as I say, is not easy, they may receive protection from the Lord so as to remain free of the many perils there are in the world, and stop their ears in order not to hear the siren's song on this dangerous sea. If we can obtain some answers from God to these requests, we shall be fighting for Him even though we are very cloistered. And if some of our requests are answered, I would consider well worthwhile the trials I have suffered in order to found this little corner, where I have also sought that this rule of our Lady and Empress be observed with the perfection with which it was observed when initiated.
6. Do not think it is useless to have these petitions continually in your heart, for with some persons it seems a difficult thing for them not to be praying a great deal for their own soul. But what better prayer is there than these petitions I mentioned? If you are uneasy because you think your sufferings in purgatory will not be shortened, know that by this prayer they will be; and if you must still pay some debts, so be it. What would it matter were I to remain in purgatory until judgment day if through my prayer I could save even one soul? How much less would it matter if my prayer is to the advantage of many and for the honor of the Lord. Pay no attention to sufferings that come to an end if through them some greater service is rendered to Him who endured so many for us. Always try to be informed about what is more perfect [for as I will ask you later, and will give my reasons, you must always communicate with learned men].
So, then, I beg you for the love of the Lord to ask His Majesty to hear us in this matter. Miserable though I am, I ask His Majesty this since it is for His glory and the good of the Church; this glory and good is the object of my desires.
7. It seems bold that I think I could play some role in obtaining an answer to these petitions. I trust, my Lord, in these Your servants who live here, and I know they desire and strive for nothing else than to please You. For You they renounced the little they had -- and would have wanted to have more so as to serve You with it. Since You, my Creator, are not ungrateful, I think You will not fail to do what they beg of You. Nor did You, Lord, when You walked in the world, despise women; rather, You always, with great compassion, helped them. [And You found as much love and more faith in them than You did in men. Among them was Your most blessed Mother, and through her merits -- and because we wear her habit -- we merit what, because of our offenses, we do not deserve. Is it not enough, Lord, that the world has intimidated us ... so that we may not do anything worthwhile for You in public or dare speak some truths that we lament over in secret, without Your also failing to hear so just a petition? I do not believe, Lord, that this could be true of Your goodness and justice, for You are a just judge and not like those of the world. Since the world's judges are sons of Adam and all of them men, there is no virtue in women that they do not hold suspect. Yes, indeed, the day will come, my King, when everyone will be known for what he is. I do not speak for myself, because the world already knows my wickedness -- and I have rejoiced that this wickedness is known publicly -- but because I see that these are times in which it would be wrong to undervalue virtuous and strong souls, even though they are women.] When we ask You for honors, income, money, or worldly things, do not hear us. But when we ask You for the honor of Your Son, why wouldn't You hear us, eternal Father, for the sake of Him who lost a thousand honors and a thousand lives for You? Not for us, Lord, for we don't deserve it, but for the blood of Your son and His merits.
8. O eternal Father, see to it that so many lashes and injuries and such heavy torments are not forgotten! How then, my Creator, can a heart as loving as Yours allow that the deeds done by Your Son with such ardent love and so as to make us more pleasing to You (for You commanded that He love us) be esteemed so little? For nowadays these heretics have so little regard for the Blessed Sacrament that they take away its dwelling places by destroying churches. Was something still to be done to please You? But He did everything. Wasn't it enough eternal Father, that while He lived He did not have a place to lay His head -- and always in the midst of so many trials? But now they take away the places He has at present for inviting His friends, for he realizes that we are weak and knows that the laborers must be nourished with such food. Hasn't He already paid far more than enough for the sin of Adam? Whenever we sin again must this loving Lamb pay? Don't allow this, my Emperor! Let Your Majesty be at once appeased! Do not look at our sins but behold that Your most blessed Son redeemed us, and behold His merits and those of His glorious Mother and of so many saints and martyrs who died for You!
9. Ay, what a pity, Lord, and who has dared to make this petition on behalf of all of us? What a bad intermediary, my daughters, is she who seeks to be heard and to make such a petition for you! Indeed, this sovereign Judge should become more indignant -- and rightly and justly so -- at seeing me so bold! But behold, my Lord, that You are a God of mercy; have mercy on this little sinner, this little worm that is so bold with You. Behold, my God, my desires and the tears with which I beg this of You; forget my deeds because of who You are; have pity on so many souls that are being lost, and help Your Church. Don't allow any more harm to come to Christianity, Lord. Give light now to these darknesses.
10. I ask you, my Sisters, for the love of the Lord, to recommend to His Majesty this poor little thing, and beg Him to give her humility. Do this as something you are obliged to do. I am not requesting you to pray in particular for kings and prelates in the Church, especially our bishop. I see you now so careful about doing so that it doesn't seem necessary for me to insist. Let those who are to come realize that if the bishop is holy the subjects will be so too; and as something very important always ask this of the Lord in your prayers. And when your prayers, desires, disciplines, and fasts are not directed toward obtaining these things I mentioned, reflect on how you are not accomplishing or fulfilling the purpose for which the Lord brought you here together. [And may the Lord because of who His Majesty is never allow you to forget this.].
