CHAPTER 7
 
Treats of the same subject, spiritual love, and gives some advice on how to obtain it.
 
1. It's strange how impassioned this love is, the tears it costs, the penances and prayer; what concern to ask prayers for the one loved from all who it thinks can help that person toward God; and what constant desire that others recommend him to God. It is not happy unless it sees that person make progress. If, on the other hand, it sees him improving and then sees him turning back somewhat, there doesn't seem to be any pleasure for it in life. It neither eats nor sleeps without this care about the other. It is always fearful lest the soul it loves so much be lost and the two be separated forever. Death here below matters nothing to it, for it doesn't want to become attached to anything that in a mere moment escapes from one's hand and cannot be grasped again. It is, as I said, a love with no self-interest at all. All that it desires or wants is to see the other soul rich with heavenly blessings.
2. This is what love is, and not these other miserable earthly affections -- although I don't mean evil ones, for God deliver us from them. We must never tire of condemning anything that leads to hell, for the slightest evil of hell cannot be exaggerated. We shouldn't let our mouths utter even a word about this sinful love, Sisters, nor should we think that it exists in the world. We shouldn't listen to anything said about it, whether this be done in jest or in truth. Do not allow that this type of love be spoken of or discussed in your presence. Such love has nothing good in it, and even hearing about it can be harmful. You may speak about the licit love I mentioned, which we have for one another or for relatives and friends and in which our care is that our loved ones don't die; or, if the other's head aches our souls seem to ache too, and if they suffer trials, it seems that we lose our patience; and other things like that.
3. Spiritual love is not like this. Even though some grief is at first felt through natural weakness, reason immediately considers whether the trial is good for the one loved, whether there is an enrichment in virtue and how that soul bears the suffering; it asks God to give the other patience and merit in the trials. If this love sees that the other person has patience, no distress is felt; rather it rejoices and is consoled. This love would much rather suffer the trial itself than see the other suffer it if the merit and gain that lies in suffering could be given to the other entirely -- but not because this love is disquieted and disturbed.
4. I say once again that spiritual love seems to be imitating that love which the good lover Jesus had for us. Hence, these lovers advance so far because they embrace all trials, and the others, without trial, receive benefit from those who love. And believe me, either these lovers will cut off their relationship -- I mean special friendship -- or they will obtain from our Lord that the one loved walk along their own way toward the same goal, as did St. Monica with St. Augustine. These lovers cannot in their hearts be insincere with those they love; if they see them deviate from the path or commit some faults they immediately tell them about it. They cannot help but do so. And since they are not going to change their attitude, nor are they going to flatter or hide anything from the other, either that other person mends his ways or the friendship is broken. For these lovers cannot suffer such a thing, nor should it be suffered. There is a continual war between the two attitudes these lovers have; on the one hand they go about forgetful of the whole world, taking no account of whether others serve God or not but only keeping account of themselves; on the other hand, with their friends, they have no power to do this, nor is anything covered over; they see the tiniest speck. I say that they bear a truly heavy cross. [Oh fortunate are the souls loved by such as these! Fortunate was the day they came to know them! O my Lord, would you not be doing me a favor if there were many who so loved me? Certainly, it would be more beneficial to me than if I were loved by all the kings and lords of the world; and rightly so, for these persons strive in as many ways as they can that we ourselves be lords of that very world and that all things be subject to us.
When you know some person like this, Sisters, let the Mother Prioress diligently strive that he speaks with you. Love such persons as much as you like. They must be few, but the Lord does desire that it be known when someone has reached perfection. You will be immediately told that speaking with him is unnecessary, that is enough to have God. But a good means to having God is to speak with His friends, for one always gains very much from this. I know through experience. After the Lord, it is because of persons like these that I am not in hell, for I was always very attached to their praying for me, and so I strove to get them to do this. Now let us return to our subject.]
5. This spiritual love is the kind of love I would desire us to have. Even though in the beginning it is not so perfect, the Lord will gradually perfect it. Let us begin by using the suitable means, for even though the love bears with it some natural tenderness no harm will be done provided this tenderness in shown toward all. It is good and necessary sometimes in loving to show and also have affection, and to feel some of the trials and sicknesses of the Sisters, even though these may be small. For at times it happens that some trifle will cause as much suffering to one as a great trial will to another; little things can bring much distress to persons who have sensitive natures. [And do not be surprised, for perhaps the devil employed all his energy here, more energy than what he uses when you feel great sufferings and trials.] If you are not like them, do not fail to be compassionate. And perhaps our Lord desires to exempt us from these sufferings, whereas in other matters we will suffer. And those sufferings that for us are heavy -- even if in themselves they truly are -- may be light for another. So in these matters let us not judge from ourselves, nor let us think that we are at a stage in which perhaps the Lord without our own effort has made us stronger, but let us think of the stage we were at when we were weaker.
6. Consider that this advice is important for knowing how to sympathize with your neighbor in his trials, however small they may be. This is especially true in the case of those souls that were mentioned. Since they desire trials they make little of everything, and it is very necessary that they take the time to remember how they themselves were once weak and that if they are not weak now, their strength doesn't come from themselves. For it could be that the devil by this means will make charity toward one's neighbor grow cold, and make us think that what in reality is a fault belongs to perfection. It is necessary to be careful and awake in everything, for he does not sleep. This is truer in the case of those advancing in perfection. The temptations are then very deceiving, since the devil wouldn't dare anything else. It doesn't seem the harm is recognized until it is already done -- if, as I say, one doesn't take care. In sum, it is necessary to watch and pray always, for there is no better remedy than prayer for discovering these secret things of the devil and bringing them to light.
7. Strive also to take time for recreation with the Sisters when there is need and during the time set aside for it by custom, even though this may not be to your pleasure, for everything done with a pure intention is perfect love. [And so it is that when I desire to speak to that other love that is not so perfect, I do not find in this house any path in which I think it would be good for us to have such love. For however good this love might be, everything must hark back to its origin, which is the perfect love I spoke of. I thought of saying much about this other love, and now that I've come to discuss its fine points, I don't think it fits our way of life. So, I want to leave the matter as it stands; I hope in God that in this house there will be no opportunity for any other kind of love then perfect love, even though our love may not be entirely perfect.] Thus, it is very good that some take pity on others in their need. Let them take care that there be no lack of discretion in things that would go against obedience. Even though within yourself the prioress' commands may seem harsh, don't show this or let anyone know about it -- unless, with humility, the prioress herself -- for you would cause much harm. And learn how to understand which are the things one ought to feel sorry about and take pity on with regard to the Sisters. And always grieve over any fault, if it is publicly known, that you see in a Sister. Here love shows itself, and it is practiced well when you know how to suffer the fault and not be surprised; so the others will do with respect to your faults, for you may have many more than you are aware of. Recommend the Sister to God and strive yourself to practice with great perfection the virtue opposite the fault that appears in her. Make every effort to do this so that you teach that Sister in deed what perhaps through words or punishment she might not understand or profit by; and the imitation of the virtue in which one sees another excel has a great tendency to spread. This is good advice; don't forget it.
8. Oh, how good and true will be the love of the Sister who can help others by setting aside her own advantage for their sake. She will make much progress in all the virtues and keep her rule with great perfection. Better friendship will this be than all the tender words that can be uttered, for these are not used, nor should they be used, in this house; those like, "my life," "my soul," "my only good," and other similar expressions addressed now to one, now to another, of the Sisters. Keep these words of affection for your Spouse, for you must be with Him so much and so alone that you will need to be helped by everything; His Majesty allows us to use these words with Him. But if they are used a lot among ourselves, they will not be so touching when used with the Lord. And besides, there's no reason for using them. They are very womanish, and I would not want you, my daughters, to be womanish in anything, nor would I want you to be like women but like strong men. For if you do what lies in your power, the Lord will make you so strong that you will astonish men. And how easy this is for His Majesty since He made us from nothing.
9. Another very good proof of love is that you strive in household duties to relieve others of work, and also rejoice and praise the Lord very much for any increase you see in their virtues. All these things, not to mention the great good they contain in themselves, help very much to further peace and conformity between the Sisters, as we now, by God's goodness, see through experience. May it please His Majesty that this love always continue. The contrary would be a terrible thing, and very difficult to endure: that is, few in number and disunited. God forbid.
10. If by chance some little word should escape, try to remedy the matter immediately and pray intensely. And if things of this sort against charity continue, such as little factions, or ambition, or concern about some little point of honor (for I think my blood freezes when I write about this and think that at some time it could happen, because I see it is the main evil in monasteries); when these things begin to take place consider yourselves lost. Think and believe that you have thrown your Spouse out of the house and have made it necessary for Him to go in search of another dwelling, since you threw Him out of His own house. Cry out to His Majesty. Seek a remedy; for if you don't find one after such frequent confession and Communion, there is reason to fear a Judas among you.
11. Let the prioress for the love of God watch carefully that no place be given to such concerns, and root them out from the beginning; for whether she does this or not will stem either all the harm or all the remedy. [And if love doesn't suffice to do this, let it be done with severe punishments.] And anyone found to be the cause of such disturbance should be sent to another monastery, for God will provide her with the dowry. Get rid of this pestilence; cut off the branches as best you can, and if this is not enough pull up the roots. And if that doesn't work, do not let the one who is taken up with these things leave the prison cell. That's much better than letting so incurable a pestilence infect all the nuns. Oh, how great an evil it is! God deliver us from the monastery where it enters; I would rather that the monastery catch fire and all be burned. Because I believe I shall say something about this elsewhere -- since it is something so important -- I'll not enlarge on it any more here.

CHAPTER 8
 
The great good that lies in detaching oneself inwardly and outwardly from all created things.
 
1. Now let us talk about the detachment we ought to have, for detachment, if it is practiced with perfection, includes everything. I say it includes everything because if we embrace the Creator and care not at all for the whole of creation, His Majesty will infuse the virtues. Doing little by little what we can, we will have hardly anything else to fight against; it is the Lord who in our defense takes up the battle against the demons and against the world.
Do you think, Sisters, it is a small blessing we receive in obtaining this grace to give ourselves to the All entirely and without reserve? And since in Him are all blessings, as I say, let us praise Him very much, Sisters, for having brought us together here where the only concern is to give ourselves entirely to Him. Indeed, I don't know why I am saying this because every one of you here can teach me. I confess that in this matter so important I am not as perfect as I desire or understand to be fitting. And this goes for all the virtues and all that I say here, for it is much easier to write about these things than to put them into practice. And I don't even succeed in writing about them, because sometimes knowing how to speak of them requires experience; and if I do succeed, it is perhaps by writing of the opposite of what I have practiced.
2. With regard to externals, obviously we are separated here from everything. [I think the Lord wants all of us He has gathered together in this house to withdraw from everything so that His Majesty may unite us to Himself here without any hindrance. O my Creator and Lord! When did I merit such honor? For it seems You went a roundabout way to bring us closer to Yourself. May it please Your goodness that we do not lose through our own fault this nearness to You.] O Sisters, understand, for the love of God, the great favor the Lord has granted those whom He brought here. Each of you should reflect upon this carefully, for there are only twelve here and His Majesty desired that you be one of them. And how many there are who are better than I, who I know would take this place eagerly, and the Lord gave it to me who so poorly deserved it! May You be blessed, my God, and may all creatures praise You! One cannot repay You for this favor -- as is likewise so for many others You have granted me -- for my vocation to be a nun was a very great favor! Since I have been so miserable, You did not trust me, Lord. Instead of keeping me where there were so many living together and where my wretchedness would not have been so clearly seen during my lifetime, You have brought me to a place where, since there are so few nuns, it seems impossible for this wretchedness not to be known. That I might walk more carefully, You have removed from me all opportunities to conceal it. Now I confess there is no longer an excuse for me, Lord, and so I have greater need of Your mercy that You might pardon any fault I may have.
3. What I ask of you, Sisters, is that if anyone sees within herself that she is unable to follow what is customarily practiced here she say so; there are other monasteries where the Lord is also served. Do not disturb these few nuns brought here together by His Majesty. In other places there is the freedom to find relief by being with relatives; here if some relatives are allowed to visit, it is that they might find relief by being with us. But the nun who desires to see them for her own consolation, if these relatives are not spiritual persons, should consider herself imperfect. She ought to believe that she is not detached, not healthy; she will not possess freedom of spirit; she will not possess complete peace. She needs a doctor; and I say that if this attachment is not removed and she is not cured, she is not meant for this house.
4. The best remedy I know is that she not see them until obviously she is free and obtains this freedom from the Lord through much prayer. When it is clear that she considers these visits a cross, it will be all right for her to see them, for then she will be of benefit to her relatives and not be harmed herself. [But if she loves her relatives, if she grieves a great deal over their sufferings and eagerly listens to what they tell her about their business affairs in the world, she should believe that she will bring harm to herself and no good to them.]

CHAPTER 9
 
On how good it is for those having left the world to flee from relatives and how they find truer friends.
 
1. Oh, if we religious could understand the great harm that comes from having too much to do with relatives! How we would flee them! I don't know what consolation they give us (if in talking with them we leave out what pertains to God and deal only with what pertains to our comfort and rest), for we cannot enjoy their recreations, nor would this be lawful for us. Oh yes, we can grieve over their trials; in fact, we do cry over all their tribulations and sometimes more than they themselves do. Surely, if they give the body some comfort, the spirit pays well for it. You are removed from this here. Since everything is held in common and no one can have any special comfort, the alms they give you are given in a general way; and you are freed from trying to please them on this account, for you know that it is the Lord who provides for all in common.
2. I am astonished by the harm that is caused from dealing with relatives. I don't think anyone will believe it except the one who has experienced it for himself. And how this practice of perfection seems to be forgotten nowadays in religious orders. I don't know what it is in the world that we renounce when we say that we give up everything for God if we do not give up the main thing, namely, our relatives. The situation has reached the state in which it seems to be a lack of virtue for religious not to love and talk a great deal with their relatives, and these religious are not afraid to say and even advance their reasons.
3. In this house, daughters, great care should be taken to recommend them to God; that is right. As for the rest, we should keep them out of our minds as much as possible, because it is a natural thing for the will to become attached to them more than to other persons.
I have been much loved by my relatives -- according to what they have said -- and I loved them so much that I didn't let them forget me. But I know through my own experience as well as that of others that in time of trial my relatives helped me least. It was the servants of God who helped me. By relatives I do not mean parents, for parents very seldom fail to help their children, and it is right for us to console them in their need. Let us not remain aloof from them if we see that communicating with them does no harm to our religious life. This communication can be carried on with detachment; and so, too, with brothers and sisters.
4. Believe, Sisters, that if you serve His Majesty as you ought, you will not find better relatives than those He sends you. I know that this is so. Convinced of that, as you are here, and understanding that in doing otherwise you would be failing your true Friend and Spouse, believe that in a very short time you will gain this freedom. Believe that you can trust those who love you only for His sake more than you can all your relatives, and that these former will not fail you. And you will find fathers and brothers in those about whom you had not even thought. For since these seek to be repaid by God, they do things for us. Those who seek to be repaid by us soon grow tired, since they see that we are poor and unable to help them in any way. And although this may not be universally so, it is now more usually so; for, after all, the world is the world.
Do not believe whoever tells you to do something else and that it is virtue to do so. For if I should mention all the harm that this association with relatives brings in its wake, I would have to enlarge a great deal. And because others who know what they are saying better than I do have written about this, what I have said should suffice. If I who am so imperfect have understood so much about this, I wonder what those who are perfect know?
5. All that the saints counsel us about fleeing the world is clearly good. Well, believe me, our relatives are what clings to us most from the world, as I have said, and the most difficult to detach ourselves from. Consequently, those who flee from their own countries do well -- if it helps them, I say, for I don't think it helps to flee bodily; rather what helps is that the soul embrace the good Jesus our Lord with determination, for since in Him everything is found, in Him everything is forgotten. Yet, it is a very great help to withdraw even bodily until we have come to know this truth. For afterward it may be that the Lord will want us to have dealings with them, giving us a cross where we used to find pleasure.
