CHAPTER 10
 
How it is not enough to be detached from what was mentioned if we are not detached from ourselves, and how both this virtue of detachment and humility go together.
 
1. Once we have detached ourselves from the world and from relatives and have enclosed ourselves here under the conditions that were mentioned, it seems that we have done all there is to do and that we don't have to struggle with anything. Oh, my Sisters, do not feel secure or let yourselves go to sleep! By feeling secure you would resemble someone who very tranquilly lies down after having locked his doors for fear of thieves while allowing the thieves to remain inside the house. And you already know that there is no worse thief than we ourselves. For if you do not walk very carefully and if each Sister is not alert in going against her own will as though doing so were more important than all else, there are many things that will take away this holy freedom of spirit by which you can fly to your Maker without being held down by clay or leaden feet.
2. A great aid to going against your will is to bear in mind continually how all is vanity and how quickly everything comes to an end. This helps to remove our attachment to trivia and center it on what will never end. Even though this practice seems to be a weak means, it will strengthen the soul greatly, and the soul will be most careful in very little things. When we begin to become attached to something, we should strive to turn our thoughts from it and bring them back to God -- and His Majesty helps. He has done us a great favor because in this house most of the work of detachment has been done -- although this turning and being against ourselves is a difficult thing because we live very close together and love ourselves greatly.
3. Here true humility can enter the picture because this virtue and the virtue of detachment it seems to me always go together. They are two inseparable sisters. These are not the relatives I advise you to withdraw from; rather, you should embrace them and love them and never be seen without them. O sovereign virtues, rulers over all creation, emperors of the world, deliverers from all snares and entanglements laid by the devil, virtues so loved by our teacher Christ who never for a moment was seen without them! Whoever has them can easily go out and fight with all hell together and against the whole world and all its occasions of sin. Such a person has no fear of anyone, for his is the kingdom of heaven. He has no one to fear because he doesn't care if he loses everything, nor would he consider this a loss. The only thing he fears is displeasing his God, and he begs God to sustain him in these virtues lest they be lost through his own fault.
4. It is true that these virtues have the characteristic of so hiding themselves from the person who possesses them that he never sees them or manages to believe that he has them even though he is told he does. But he esteems them so highly that he always goes about striving to obtain them, and he gradually perfects them within himself. Yet, they are so manifest in the one who possesses them that without his desiring it, these virtues are at once recognized by others who deal with him.
But what foolishness that I should set about praising humility and mortification when they were so much praised by the King of Glory and so confirmed by His many trials. Now, my daughters, this is the work that must be done in order to escape from the land of Egypt, for in finding these virtues you will find the manna. All things will taste good to you. However bad a thing may taste to those who are in the world, you will find it sweet.
5. Now, then, the first thing we must strive for is to rid ourselves of our love for our bodies, for some of us are by nature such lovers of comfort that there is no small amount of work in this area. And we are so fond of our health that it is amazing what a war our bodies cause, especially with nuns and even with those who are not. But some nuns it seems, including myself, didn't come to the monastery for any other reason than to strive not to die; each one strives for this as best she can. Here, truthfully, there is little opportunity to do this in deed, but I wouldn't want there to be even the desire. Be determined, Sisters, that you came to die for Christ, not to live comfortably for Christ. The devil suggests that you indulge yourselves so that you can keep the observance of the order; and a nun will so eagerly want to strive to care for and preserve her health for the sake of keeping the observance of the order that she dies without ever having kept this observance entirely for so much as a month, nor perhaps for even a day. Well, I don't know why we have come here!
6. Do not fear; very seldom will we lack discretion in this matter, for our confessors will at once be afraid that we may kill ourselves with penances. And the lack of such discretion is so abhorred by us that I wish we'd be so discreet in everything. I know that those who do the opposite will not care that I say this, nor do I care if they say I am judging from myself, for they would be saying the truth. I find for myself that the Lord wishes that we be sickly; at least in my case He granted me a great mercy in my being sick; for since I would have looked after my comfort anyway, He desired that there be a reason for my doing so.
Now it is amusing to see these persons and the torment they put themselves through. Sometimes they feel a desire to do penances without rhyme or reason, a desire that lasts a couple of days, so to speak; subsequently the devil makes them imagine that the penances did them harm. He makes them fear penance, and after some attempts they don't even dare carry out what the order commands. We don't keep some of the very ordinary things of the rule, such as silence, which isn't going to do us any harm. Hardly does our head begin to ache than we stop going to choir, which won't kill us either. [We stay away one day because our head ached, another because it was just now aching, and three more so that it won't ache again.] And we seek to invent penances in our heads with the result that we can neither do the penances nor keep the observance. And at times the illness is slight, but we think we aren't obliged to do anything since we have done our duty by asking permission.
7. You will ask why the prioress gives it. If she knew what was going on inside us, perhaps she wouldn't give it. But since you tell her about your need and there is no want of a doctor to side with you about the advisability of such permission, or a friend or relative to weep at your side, what can she do? She has a scruple that she might fail in charity. She would rather that you fail than that she herself fail. [And it doesn't seem to her right to judge badly of you. Oh, God help me, this complaining among nuns! May He forgive me, but I fear it has already become a custom. Once there was a nun who complained to me about a headache, and she complained a great deal about it. When it came time to examine her, the head didn't ache at all, but she felt an ache somewhere else.]
8. These are the things that can happen sometimes; that you might be on guard against them, I am putting them down here. For if the devil begins to frighten us about losing our health, we shall never do anything. May the Lord give us the light to be right about everything, amen.

CHAPTER 11
 
Continues to discuss mortification, and speaks about what must be acquired in sickness.
 
1. It seems to me an imperfection, my Sisters, to be always complaining about light illnesses. If you can tolerate them, don't complain about them. When the sickness is serious, it does the complaining itself; this is different and the sickness is immediately obvious. Consider that you are few, and if one has this habit of complaining, it wears everyone out if you have love for one another and there is charity. If someone is truly sick, she should say so and take the necessary remedy. If you have lost self-love, you will feel any self-indulgence so keenly that there is no fear you will take anything without necessity or complain needlessly. If there is some need, it would be worse not to say anything than to seek your comfort without being sick, and it would be very wrong if the others did not feel compassion for you.
2. Moreover, where there's charity, and so few nuns, concern about your getting well will surely never be lacking. But with regard to some of the weaknesses and little illnesses of women, forget about complaining of them, for sometimes the devil makes us imagine these pains. They are things that come and go. If you do not lose the habit of speaking and complaining about everything -- unless you do so to God -- you will never finish your lamenting. [I insist so much on this because I think it's very important and a reason why monasteries have mitigated their observance.] A fault this body has is that the more comfort we try to give it the more needs it discovers. It's amazing how much comfort it wants; and since in the case of health the need presents itself under the color of some good, however small it may be, the poor soul is deceived and doesn't grow.
3. Remember how many sick people there are who are poor and have no one to complain to; now it is nonsense to think one can be poor and live in comfort. Recall as well many women who are married. I know of some who are persons of high station and who have serious illnesses and heavy trials but for fear of annoying their husbands dare not complain. Well, sinner that I am! Indeed, we have not come here to receive more comfort than they! Oh, you who are free from the great trials of the world, learn how to suffer a little for love of God without having everyone know about it! If a woman in an unhappy marriage suffers much adversity without being able to receive comfort from anyone lest her husband know that she speaks and complains about it, shouldn't we suffer just between ourselves and God some of the illnesses He gives us because of our sins? And even more so because by our complaining the sickness is not alleviated.
4. In all this that I have said I am not dealing with serious illnesses, when there is great fever -- although I beg for moderation and always patience -- but of little ailments, that one can bear on one's feet. But what would happen if this that I'm writing were seen outside the house? What would all the nuns say about me? How willingly I would suffer their talk if someone were to make amends! For if there is but one nun like this, the situation can reach a point that for the most part no one is believed no matter how serious her sickness may be. Let us remember our holy fathers of the past, those hermits whose lives we aim to imitate. What sufferings they endured! What solitude, cold, and hunger, and what sun and heat, without anyone to complain to but God! Do you think they were made of steel? Well, they were as delicate as we. And believe, daughters, that when we begin to conquer these wretched little bodies, we will not be so troubled by them. There will be enough Sisters to look after what is necessary; forget about yourselves except in what concerns a definite need. If we do not determine once and for all to swallow death and the lack of health, we will never do anything. Strive not to fear them; abandon yourselves totally to God, come what may. So what if we die? If our body has mocked us so often, shouldn't we mock it at least once?
5. And believe that this determination is more important than we realize. For little by little as we grow accustomed to this attitude we shall, with the Lord's help, remain lords of our bodies. Now, then, conquering such an enemy is a very important means to enduring the battle of this life. May the Lord conquer him as He alone can. I truly believe that the benefits coming from this practice are not known except by one who already enjoys the victory. They are so great, from what I believe, that no one would feel he was undergoing trial if he could remain in this calm and dominion.

CHAPTER 12
 
How the true lover of God will have little regard for his own life and honor.
 
1. Let us go on to other things that are also quite important, although they may seem small. Everything seems to be a heavy burden, and rightly so, because it involves a war against ourselves. But once we begin to work, God does so much in the soul and grants it so many favors that all that one can do in this life seems little. And as nuns we do the most we can; that is, we give up our freedom for the love of God, placing it in the power of another, and undergo so many trials and fasts, so much silence, enclosure, and service in choir that however much we may want to please ourselves we can only seldom do so. And in many of the monasteries that I have seen, perhaps I am the only one who pleases herself. Why should we, then, delay in practicing interior mortification? For interior mortification makes everything else more meritorious and perfect, and afterward enables us to do the other things with greater ease and repose. This interior mortification is acquired, as I have said, by proceeding gradually, not giving in to our own will and appetites, even in little things, until the body is completely surrendered to the spirit.
2. I repeat that the whole matter, or a great part of it, lies in losing concern about ourselves and our own satisfaction. The least that any of us who has truly begun to serve the Lord can offer Him is our own life. Since we have given the Lord our will, what do we fear? It is clear that if someone is a true religious or a true person of prayer and aims to enjoy the delights of God, he must not turn his back upon the desire to die for God and suffer martyrdom. For don't you know yet, Sisters, that the life of a good religious who desires to be one of God's close friends is a long martyrdom? A long martyrdom because in comparison with the martyrdom of those who are quickly beheaded, it can be called long; but all life is short, and the life of some extremely short. And how do we know if ours won't be so short that at the very hour or moment we determine to serve God completely it will come to an end? This is possible. In sum, there is no reason to give importance to anything that will come to an end. And who will not work hard if he thinks that each hour is the last? Well, believe me, thinking this is the safest course.
3. So, let us try hard to go against our own will in everything. For if you are careful, as I said, you will gradually, without knowing how, find yourselves at the summit. But how extremely rigorous, it seems, to say that we shouldn't please ourselves in anything when we do not also mention the pleasure and delight this going against our will carries in its wake and what is gained by it even in this life. What security! Since all of you practice this denial here, the most is done; for you awaken and help one another. This is the practice in which each one should strive to be ahead of the others.
4. Take careful note of interior stirrings, especially if they have to do with privileges of rank. God, by His Passion, deliver us from dwelling on such words or thoughts as, "I have seniority," "I am older," "I have done more work," "the other is treated better than I." If such thoughts come they should be quickly cut off. If you dwell on them or begin to speak about them, the result is a pestilence from which great evils arise [in monasteries. Be careful, for I know a great deal about it!] If you should have a prioress who consents to this kind of thing, however small, believe that God has permitted, on account of your sins, that you have her as prioress so that you will begin to go astray; and pray hard that He will provide a remedy because you are in great danger.
5. Perhaps you will say: "Why should I give so much importance to this detachment and be so rigorous about it, for God gives consolations to those who are not so detached?" I believe He does do this, for in His infinite wisdom He sees that this is fitting so as to draw them to give up everything for Him. I do not call "giving up everything" entering religious life, for there can be impediments to entering religious life, and the perfect soul can be detached and humble anywhere; although this latter may involve greater trial, for being in a monastery is a big help. But believe me in one thing: if there is any vain esteem of honor or wealth (and this can be had inside monasteries as well as outside, although inside the occasions for it are more removed and the fault would be greater), you will never grow very much or come to enjoy the true fruit of prayer. And this is so even though you may have many years of experience in prayer -- or, better, I should say reflection because perfect prayer in the end removes these bad habits.
6. Consider, Sisters, whether any of these things pertain to you; you are here for no other purpose. It will be due to your vain esteem of honor that you will not be honored. Moreover, you will lose the benefit you could have otherwise gained; thus dishonor and loss will be joined together here.
Let each one consider how much humility she has, and she will see what progress has been made. It doesn't seem to me the devil will tempt the truly humble person about rank even with the first stirrings. Since he is so shrewd, he fears getting hurt. It is impossible for a person who is humble not to gain strength and progress in humility when the devil tempts him in this way. Clearly, a humble person will reflect on his life and consider how he has served the Lord in comparison with how the Lord ought to be served and the wonders the Lord performed in lowering Himself so as to give us an example of humility; and he will consider his sins and where he merited to be on account of them. The soul ends up with so much gain that the devil doesn't dare return another day lest he get his head crushed.
7. Take this advice from me and do not forget it; do not strive only in an interior way -- for it would be a very great loss if we didn't derive some benefit from these acts of humility -- but strive also in an exterior way that the Sisters draw some benefit from your temptation. If you wish to take revenge on the devil and free yourself more quickly from temptation, ask the prioress as soon as the temptation comes to give you orders to do some lowly task; or, if possible, do it on your own and go about studying how to double your willingness to do things that go contrary to your nature. The Lord will reveal these things to you, and in this way and as a result the temptation will last only a short while. God deliver us from persons who are concerned about honor while trying to serve Him. Consider it an evil gain, and, as I said, honor is itself lost by desiring it, especially in matters of rank. For there is no toxin in the world that kills perfection as do these things.
8. You will say that these are natural little things to which we need pay no attention. Don't fool yourselves, they increase like foam, and there is nothing so small in which there is so obvious a danger as this concern about honor and whether we have been offended. Do you know why -- besides many other reasons? Perhaps this concern begins in someone as something small and amounting to hardly anything, and then the devil stirs another to think it is something big, and this other will even think she is practicing charity by going and saying to the offended nun, "How do you put up with such an offense? God give you patience to offer it up; a saint wouldn't suffer more." The devil puts such malicious talk on the other Sister's tongue that though you barely overcome the offense, you are still tempted to vainglory, when in reality you did not suffer with the perfection with which you should have suffered.
9. And this nature of ours is so weak that merely by telling ourselves that the offense should not be tolerated, we think and believe that we have done something; how much more is this so when we see that others feel this way for us. And a result, the soul loses the occasions it had for meriting; it becomes weaker and opens the door for the devil to come again with something worse. And it could even happen, when you want to suffer the injury, that they will come to you and say: "Are you a beast or what? It's good for you to feel things." [Huh, and if one of them is a friend!] Oh, for the love of God, my Sisters! May no one be moved by an indiscreet charity to show pity for another in something that touches upon these false injuries, for such pity is like that of Job's wife and friends.
