Oh, what a great act of charity and what a great service to God a nun would perform if when she sees that she cannot follow the practices of perfection and customs of this house she would recognize the fact and go, and leave the others in peace! And they shouldn't keep her in any of the monasteries -- at least if they believe me -- nor allow her to make profession until after many years of trial to see if she makes amends. I am not referring to failures in the penance and fasts. Even though these are faults, such failures are not things that cause so much harm. But I am speaking about persons who by temperament like to be esteemed and honored and who look at the faults of others and never at their own, and other similar things that truly arise from lack of humility. If God doesn't favor her with a great spiritual gift and if after many years you don't see her make amends, may He free you so that she doesn't remain in your company. Realize that she won't be at peace nor will she allow anyone else to be. Since you do not accept a dowry, God grants you the freedom to send a nun away. What I pity about monasteries is that often, so as not to return the money, they allow the thief to steal the treasure from them, or they do so for the sake of the relatives' honor. In this house you have risked and lost the honor of this world, for the poor receive no honor. Don't desire that others have it at such a cost to yourselves. Our honor, Sisters, must be to serve God. If someone becomes a hindrance to your doing this, she should remain at home with her honor. For this reason our fathers ordained a one-year probation, and in our order we have the faculty to delay the profession for four years. And in this house I would like to delay it even ten years. A humble nun will not mind a delay of profession. She already knows that if she is good they will not dismiss her; if she is not good, why does she desire to do harm to this college of Christ? In saying 'not good,' I am not speaking of some vanity; for, with God's help, I hope such a thing will stay far from this house. In saying 'not good,' I mean not being mortified but being attached to worldly things or to oneself in the matters I have mentioned. And the nun who doesn't see much detachment in herself should believe me and not make profession, if she doesn't want to have a hell here below. And please God she will not have another in the next life, for there are many things in her that could cause such a misfortune; and perhaps those in the house will not understand them, nor perhaps will she, as I have understood them.
