To my Padre and Señor, Maestro Fray Domingo Báñez.
1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor and in my soul. When I was sick I wrote you a long letter telling you about the ups and downs of my health, and sent it by way of Medina -- I don't know why they didn't deliver it. Now I would also like to write at length, but I have many letters to write and I am feeling cold, for it is the day of the quartan fever. I've been without it, or half without it, for two days. But since the pain I used to have along with it hasn't returned, it all amounts to nothing.
2. I praise our Lord for the news I hear about your sermons, and I am very envious. And now, since you are the superior of that house, I feel a longing to be there. But when have you ceased being my superior? If I were there, though, it seems to me I would experience a new joy. But since I don't deserve anything but the cross, I praise him who gives it to me always.
3. I was delighted with those letters of Father Visitator to you, mi padre. Not only is that friend of yours a saint, but he knows how to show it, and if his words do not contradict his deeds, he proceeds very wisely. And although what he says is true, he will not fail to admit her, because between lords and lords the difference is great.
4. The Princess of Eboli as a nun was something to cry over. That angel there, as a nun, can be of benefit to other souls, and the greater the outcry, all the more! I find no drawbacks. The worst that can happen is that she leave, but the Lord in the meantime will have drawn out, as I say, other benefits and perhaps have stirred some soul who otherwise without this means might have been condemned. Great are God's judgments, and there is no reason for us to deny admission to one who loves him so authentically when she is in the danger that all these illustrious people are in. Nor should we refuse to bear the trial of some disturbance in exchange for so great a good. To make her wait, it seems to me, would be like going along with the world and copying its ways, and it would be a torment to her. It is clear that even if she did change her mind during the thirty days, she would not say so. But if such a delay would placate her parents, justify her cause, and provide for the waiting period your honor desires -- it would be no more, I repeat, than a delay -- may God be with her. For it is impossible for whoever gives up much not to receive much from God since he gives so much to us who have given up nothing.
5. I am greatly consoled that you are there to lend support to the prioress and that she may do what is right in all matters. May he be blessed who has thus arranged everything. I hope in His Majesty that all things will go well. This business with Pedro de la Banda is never-ending. I believe I'll have to go first to Alba so as not to lose time, for there is a danger in this matter that the conflict is between him and his wife.
6. I greatly pity the nuns in Pastrana. Even though the princess has returned home, they are like captives, for the prior of Atocha went there and did not dare visit them. Now she is also mad at the friars. I don't know why they should have to put up with such slavery. I am doing well with Padre Medina. I think that if I were to speak with him often, everything would soon be smoothed over. He is so busy that I hardly see him ...
Doña María Cosneza told me that I shouldn't prize him as highly as I do you ...
7. Doña Beatriz is well. Last Friday she repeatedly offered to do something for me; but now I don't need anything, thanks be to God. She told me about the goodness you have shown her. The love of God permits many things; if it is in the least bit lacking, everything would be finished. Your difficulty, it seems, is to write at length; mine is to be brief. Nonetheless, you do me a great favor because I do not grow sad when I see a bundle of letters and yours is not among them. May God keep you. It doesn't seem this letter should ... May it please God that my excess will not be tempered by your silence.
Your honor's servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
