CHAPTER 19
 
Begins to discuss prayer. Speaks to souls unable to reason with the intellect.
 
1. So many days have gone by since I wrote the above, days in which I haven't had time to return to it, that if I don't reread it I won't know what I was saying. So as not to take up time, I'll have to let this work turn out in whatever way it does, without any order. There are so many good books written by able persons for those who have methodical minds and for souls that are experienced and can concentrate within themselves that it would be a mistake if you paid attention to what I say about prayer. As I say, there are books in which the mysteries of the Lord's life and Passion are divided according to the days of the week, and there are meditations about judgment, hell, our nothingness, and the many things we owe God together with excellent doctrine and method concerning the beginning and end of prayer. There is nothing for me to say to anyone who can form the habit of following this method of prayer, or who has already formed it, for by means of so good a path the Lord will draw him to the haven of light. And through such a good beginning the end will be reached. All who are able to walk along this path will have rest and security, for when the intellect is bound one proceeds peacefully.
But what I would like to speak about and offer a remedy for, if the Lord should will that I succeed -- and if I don't, at least you will understand that there are many souls who undergo this trial, and those of you who suffer it will not grow weary -- is the following.
2. There are some souls and minds so scattered they are like wild horses no one can stop. Now they're running here, now there, always restless. [And if the rider is skillful, there is not always a danger -- just sometimes. But even though his life is in no danger, he is not free from some dishonor in mounting the wild horse; and there is always some hardship.] This restlessness is either caused by the soul's nature or permitted by God. I pity these souls greatly, for they seem to be like very thirsty persons who see water in the distance, but when they want to go there, they meet someone who prevents their passing from the beginning through the middle to the end. It happens that after they have conquered the first enemy through their labor -- and through a great deal of labor -- they let themselves be conquered by the second; they would rather die of thirst than drink water so costly. Their efforts cease, their courage fails. And when some have the courage to conquer the second class of enemy as well, their strength gives way when they meet the third, and perhaps they were no more than two steps from the fount of living water, of which the Savior said to the Samaritan woman, "whoever drinks of it will never thirst." How right and true, as words coming from the mouth of Truth Itself, that such a person will not thirst for anything in this life -- although thirst for the things of the next life increases much more than can ever be imagined through natural thirst! How thirsty one becomes for this thirst! The soul understands the great value of this thirst, and even though the thirst is a most painful, wearying one, it brings with it the very satisfaction by which it is assuaged, in such a way that it is a thirst unquenchable except in earthly things. Indeed, this thirst slakes in such a way that when God satisfies the thirst, the greatest favor He can grant the soul is to leave in it this same need -- and a greater one -- to drink the water again.
3. Water has three properties that I now recall as applicable to our subject, for it must have many more. The first is that it refreshes; for, no matter how much heat we may experience, as soon as we approach the water the heat goes away. If there is a great fire, it is extinguished by water -- unless the fire burns from pitch; then it is enkindled more. Oh, God help me, what marvels there are in this greater enkindling of the fire by water when the fire is strong, powerful, and not subject to the elements. For this water doesn't impede the fire, though it is fire's contrary, but rather makes the fire increase! It would be a great help here to be able to speak with someone who knows philosophy, for in knowing the properties of things he would be able to explain to me what I enjoy thinking about but don't know how to speak of or even perhaps understand.
4. Those of you, Sisters, who drink this water and you others, once the Lord brings you to drink, will enjoy it and understand how the true love of God -- if it is strong, completely free of earthly things, and if it flies above them -- is lord of all the elements and of the world. And since water flows from the earth, don't fear that it will extinguish this fire of the love of God; such a thing does not lie within its power. Even though the two are contraries, this fire is absolute lord; it isn't subject to water. Hence do not be surprised, Sisters, about the many things I have written in this book so that you might obtain this liberty. Isn't it wonderful that a poor nun of St. Joseph's can attain dominion over all the earth and the elements? No wonder the saints, with the help of God, were able to do with the elements whatever they wanted. Fire and water obeyed St. Martin; even the birds and the fish, St. Francis; and so it was with many other saints. There was clear evidence that they had dominion over all worldly things because they labored to take little account of them and were truly subject with all their strength to the Lord of the world. So, as I say, the water that rises from the earth has no power over the love of God; the flames of this love are very high, and the source of it is not found in anything so lowly.
There are other little fires of love of God that any event will extinguish. But extinguish this fire? No, not at all! Even though a whole sea of temptations comes, the fire will not be put out and thereby made to lose control over these temptations. [For with the help of God and doing what lies in their power, men can almost seek this love by right. Do you think that because the Psalmist says that all things are subject to man and put under his feet that it is so with all men? Not at all! On the contrary, I see many of them subject to and trampled upon by things. In fact, I knew a gentleman who was killed in a quarrel over a few dimes. What a miserable price he was subject to. There are many things you will see every day from which you will know that I am speaking the truth. If the psalmist couldn't lie -- for what he says is from the Holy Spirit -- it seems to me that the saying, "they will rule over all earthly things," pertains to the perfect. It could be that I don't understand and am foolish, but I have read this.]
5. Well, if it is water that rains from heaven, so much less will it extinguish this fire; the two are not contraries but from the same land. Have no fear that the one element will do harm to the other; rather, they help each other produce their effect. For the water of true tears, those that flow in true prayer, readily given by the King of heaven, helps the fire burn more and last longer; and the fire helps the water bring refreshment. Oh, God help me, what a beautiful and marvelous thing, that fire makes one feel cooler! Yes, and it even freezes all worldly attachments when it is joined to the living water from heaven. Heaven is the source of the tears that were mentioned, for they are given and not acquired through our own efforts. Therefore, this living water will certainly not let the heat from worldly things detain the soul -- unless to allow the soul to communicate this fire to others. For by its nature this fire is not content with little; it would burn up the whole world if it could.
6. Another property of water is that it cleans dirty things. What would the world be like if there were no water for washing? Do you know how clean this water is, this heavenly water, this clear water, when it isn't cloudy, when it isn't muddy, but falls from heaven? Once this water has been drunk, I am certain that it leaves the soul bright and cleansed of all faults. Since this divine union is something very supernatural, it is not a matter of our own choosing. As I have written, God doesn't permit a soul to drink this water unless to cleanse it and leave it clean and free from all the mud and misery in which, through its own faults, it was struck. Other delights that come through the medium of the intellect, however much they may accomplish, come from water running on the ground; they do not come from drinking at the fount. There is never a lack of muddy things to detain one on this path, and the water is not so pure and clean. Living water is not what I call this prayer in which, as I say, there is reasoning with the intellect; I mean from the way I understand things. For something from the road that we don't want will stick to our soul and be helped to cling there by our body and natural lowliness, however much we may want to avoid this.
7. Let me explain myself further: suppose that in order to despise the world we are thinking about its nature and how all things come to an end. Almost without our realizing it we find ourselves thinking about the things we like in the world; and in desiring to flee them, we are at least hindered a little by thinking about how they were and how they will be and what we will do; in order to think of what we must do to free ourselves, we place ourselves in danger again. Not that this reasoning must be abandoned, but one must be fearful; it's necessary to proceed with care.
By means of this living water the Lord Himself takes up these cares, for He doesn't want to entrust them to us. He so esteems our soul that He doesn't allow it to be occupied with things that can harm it during the time He wishes to favor it. Rather, He immediately places it near Himself and shows it in an instant more truths, and gives it clearer understanding of what everything is, than we could have here below in many years. For our eyes don't see clearly; the dust blinds us as we walk. By this living water the Lord brings us to the end of the journey without our understanding how.
8. The other property of water is that it satisfies to the full and takes away thirst. To me it seems that thirst signifies the desire for something of which we are in great want, so that if the thing is completely lacking its absence will kill us. How strange that if water is lacking, this lack kills us; and if there is too much, we die, as is seen through the many who drown. O my Lord, and who will find himself so immersed in this living water that he will die! But, is this possible? Yes, because the love of God and desire for Him can increase so much that the natural subject is unable to endure it, and so there have been persons who have died from love. I know of one who would have died if God hadn't succored her immediately with such an abundance of this living water, for she was almost carried out of herself with raptures. I say that she was almost carried out of herself because in this water the soul finds rest. It seems that while she is drowning from not being able to endure the world, she is revived in God; and His Majesty enables her to enjoy what in herself she couldn't without dying.
9. It should be understood here that since there can be nothing imperfect in our supreme Good, everything He gives is for our good; and however great the abundance of this water He gives, there cannot be too much in anything of His. If He gives a great deal, He gives the soul, as I said, the capacity to drink much; like a glassmaker who makes the vessel a size he sees is necessary in order to hold what he intends to pour into it.
In desiring this water there is always some fault, since the desire comes from ourselves; if some good comes, it comes from the Lord who helps. But we are so indiscreet that since the pain is sweet and delightful, we never think we can have enough of this pain. We eat without measure, we foster this desire as much as we can, and so sometimes it kills. How fortunate such a death! But perhaps by continuing to live we can help others die of desire for this death. And I believe the devil causes this desire for death, for he understands the harm that can be done by such a person while alive; and so at this stage he tempts one to perform indiscreet penances so that one's health will be lost, which would be no small gain for the devil.
10. I say that anyone who reaches the experience of this thirst that is so impelling should be very careful because I believe he will have this temptation. And although he may not die of thirst, his health will be lost and he will give exterior manifestations of this thirst, even though he may not want to; these manifestations should be avoided at all costs. Sometimes our diligence is of little avail, for we will be unable to hide everything we would like to hide. But when these impulses that so greatly increase this desire to die come, we should be careful not to add to the desire, but gently cut the thread with another consideration. For our nature at times can be as much at work as the love; there are persons who will vehemently desire anything, even if it is bad. I don't believe these persons will be very mortified, for mortification helps in everything. It seems foolish to cut short something good; but it isn't. For I do not say that the desire is taken away, but that it is cut short, and perhaps by another desire as meritorious as the former.
11. I wish to say something in order to explain myself better: a great desire is given to see oneself with God and to be loosed from this prison, like the desire St. Paul had. Pain for a reason like this must in itself be very delightful; no small amount of mortification is needed to break it off, and one will be unable to do so completely. Sometimes the pain is seen to afflict so much that it almost takes away one's reason. Not long ago I saw a person of an impetuous nature who, even though she was experienced in going against her will -- I think she had already lost it, as was seen in other things -- was deranged for a while by the great pain and the effort that was made to conceal this pain. I hold that in so extreme a case, even though the experience may come from the Spirit of God, the humble thing is to be fearful, for we shouldn't think we have so much charity that it will put us in such straits.
12. If a person is able -- for perhaps he will not always be able -- I say that I wouldn't consider it wrong if he were to remove the desire by the thought that if he lives he will serve God more and enlighten some soul that would have been lost, and that by serving more he will merit the capacity to enjoy God more. And let him fear the little that he has served. These consoling thoughts are good for so great a work. His affliction will be mitigated, and he will gain very much. For in order to serve the Lord Himself, one should desire to suffer here below and live with the Lord's affliction. It's as when one has a great trial or a heavy sorrow; you comfort him by telling him to be patient and leave it in the hands of God and that the Lord's will is being done by it, for in every event the best we can do is leave ourselves in the hands of God.
13. It would be possible for the devil in some way to foster such a great desire. The account is given, I believe in Cassian, of a hermit who lived a most austere life. The devil made him think that by throwing himself into a well he would see God more quickly. I truly believe that this hermit could not have served with humility or goodness; for the Lord is faithful, and His Majesty would not consent that one be blinded in a matter so obvious. But clearly, if the desire were from God, it wouldn't cause any harm: such a desire bears light, discretion, and measure. But this adversary and enemy of ours tries to cause harm wherever he can; and since he doesn't go about carelessly, neither should we. This is an important point for many reasons. Thus the time of prayer should be shortened, however delightful the prayer may be, when it is seen that the bodily energies are failing or that the head might suffer harm. Discretion is very necessary in all.
14. Why do you think, daughters, that I have tried to explain the goal and show you the reward before the battle, by telling you about the good that comes from drinking of this heavenly fount, of this living water? So that you will not be dismayed by the trial and contradiction there is along the way, and advance with courage and not grow weary. For, as I have said, it can happen that after having arrived you will have nothing left to do but stoop and drink from the fount; and yet you will abandon everything and lose this good, thinking that you have not the strength to reach it and that you are not meant for it.
15. Behold, the Lord invites all. Since He is truth itself, there is no reason to doubt. If this invitation were not a general one, the Lord wouldn't have called us all, and even if He called all, He wouldn't have promised, "I will give you to drink." He could have said, "Come all of you, for in the end you won't lose anything, and to those whom I choose I will give to drink." But since He spoke without this condition to all, I hold as certain that all those who do not falter on the way will drink this living water. May the Lord, because of who He is, give us the grace to seek this living water as it should be sought, for He promises it.

CHAPTER 20
 
How in different ways consolation is never lacking on the path of prayer. Counsels the Sisters to let their conversations deal always with prayer.
 
1. It seems I contradicted in the previous chapter what I had said before. When I was consoling those who were not contemplatives, I said that the Lord had different paths by which to go to Him just as there are many dwelling places. So I repeat it now. Since His Majesty has understood our weakness, He has provided after the manner of who He is. But He did not say: "some come by this path, and others by another." Rather, His mercy was so great He excluded no one from striving to come to this fount of life to drink. May He be blessed forever! And how rightly might He have excluded me!
2. Now, since He didn't stop me when I started to walk along this path, nor order me to be thrown into the abyss, surely He excludes no one; rather, He calls us publicly, crying aloud. But since He is so good, He does not force us; on the contrary, in many ways He gives drink to those who wish to follow Him so that no one will go without consolation or die of thirst. Rivers stream from this overflowing fount, some large, others small; and sometimes little pools for children -- for that is enough for them, and moreover it would frighten them to see a lot of water. These children are the ones who are at the beginning. So, Sisters, do not fear that you will die of thirst on this road. Never is the lack of consoling water such that it cannot be endured. Since this is so, take my advice and do not stop on the road but, like the strong, fight even to death in the search, for you are not here for any other reason than to fight. You must always proceed with this determination to die rather than fail to reach the end of the journey. If even though you so proceed, the Lord should lead you in such a way that you are left with some thirst in this life, in the life that lasts forever He will give you to drink in great plenty and you will have no fear of being without water. May it please the Lord that we ourselves do not fail, amen.
3. Now, that you might so walk along this path of prayer that you do not go astray at the beginning, let us deal a little with how this journey must begin; for the beginning is the more important part -- indeed it is the most important part for everything. I don't say that if a person doesn't have the determination of which I shall speak here, he should stop trying; for the Lord will continue perfecting him. And if that person should do no more than take one step, the step will contain in itself so much power that he will not have to fear losing it, nor will he fail to be very well paid.
This situation can be compared to that of a person who uses beads to count indulgenced prayers. If he uses them once, he gains the indulgences; if he uses them more often, he gains more; but if he never uses them, keeping them rather in a chest, it would be better for him not to have them. So it is here: even though afterward a person may not continue on the same road, the little progress he may have made on it will have provided him with light so that he may walk well on other paths; and the greater the progress, the more light. In sum, even if later he gives up, he may be certain that it will not have done him any harm to have begun; for good never produces evil.
Thus, daughters, in reference to all the persons who speak with you, if they are disposed and there is some friendship, try to remove any fear they may have of beginning to use so great a good. And for the love of God I beg you that your conversation always be directed toward bringing some good to the one with whom you are speaking, for your prayer must be for the benefit of souls. And since the good of souls is what you must always beg the Lord for, it would seem wrong, Sisters, if you did not strive for this in every way.
4. If you want to be a good relative, this desire to be of benefit to the relative is where true friendship lies; if you want to be a good friend, know that you cannot be one save by this path. Let truth dwell in your hearts, as it should through meditation, and you will see clearly the kind of love we are obliged to have for our neighbor.
There's no longer time, Sisters, for children's games, for these worldly friendships, even though they may be good, seem to be nothing else. Unless there is a very good reason and it is for the benefit of that soul, don't let your conversation be of the sort in which you ask, "Do you like me?" or "Don't you like me?" It can happen that in order that your relative or brother or a similar person listen to a truth you want to point out and admit it you will have to dispose him by means of these words and demonstrations of love that are always pleasing to sensuality. It will happen that a good word, as these are called, will do more and dispose one more than will many about God so that afterward these latter may be accepted. And thus if you use them knowingly for the benefit of others, I do not forbid them. But if they are not used for this reason, they will be of no avail and may do harm without your realizing it. Others already know that you are religious and that your business is prayer. Don't think to yourself that you don't want them to consider you good, for what they see in you is to the benefit or harm of all. And it is a serious wrong for those who have so great an obligation to speak of God, as do nuns, to think that it is good for them to hide their feelings about God; although they may be allowed to do this sometimes for a greater good. God is your business and language. Whoever wants to speak to you must learn this language; and if he doesn't, be on your guard that you don't learn his; it will be a hell.
5. If they should think you're unsophisticated, what does it matter? If they take you for hypocrites, it matters even less. You will gain in that no one will want to see you except the one who understands this language. There wouldn't be much reason for anyone who doesn't know Arabic to enjoy speaking a great deal with one who knows only that language. And so, neither will they make you weary or do you harm, for to begin to speak a new language would cause no small amount of harm, and all your time would be spent in learning it. And you cannot know as I do, for I have experience of it, the great evil this new language is for the soul; in order to know the one, the other is forgotten. The new language involves a constant disturbance from which you ought to flee at all costs, for what is very suited to this path that we are beginning to discuss is peace and tranquility of soul.
6. If those who speak with you wish to learn your language, though it is not your business to teach anyone, you can tell about the riches that are gained in learning it since telling of this is beneficial to the other, and when he learns about the great gain that is to be had, he may go and seek out a master who will teach him. It would be no small favor from the Lord if you were to succeed in awakening some soul to this good.
But how many things come to mind in beginning to discuss this path, even to the mind of one who has walked it as poorly as I. [Would that I had many hands with which to write so that while putting down some of these things I wouldn't forget the others.] May the Lord be pleased, Sisters, that I know how to speak of it better than I have practiced it, amen.

CHAPTER 21
 
Tells how important it is to begin the practice of prayer with great determination and not to pay attention to obstacles set up by the devil.
 
1. Do not be frightened, daughters, by the many things you need to consider in order to begin this divine journey which is the royal road to heaven. A great treasure is gained by traveling this road; no wonder we have to pay what seems to us a high price. The time will come when you will understand how trifling everything is next to so precious a reward.
2. Now returning to those who want to journey on this road and continue until they reach the end, which is to drink from this water of life. I say that how they are to begin is very important -- in fact, all important. They must have a great and very resolute determination to persevere until reaching the end, come what may, happen what may, whatever work is involved, whatever criticism arises, whether they arrive or whether they die on the road, or even if they don't have courage for the trials that are met, or if the whole world collapses. You will hear some persons frequently making objections: "there are dangers"; "so-and-so went astray by such means"; "this other one was deceived"; "another who prayed a great deal fell away"; "it's harmful to virtue"; "it's not for women, for they will be susceptible to illusions"; "it's better they stick to their sewing"; "they don't need these delicacies"; "the Our Father and the Hail Mary are sufficient."
3. This last statement, Sisters, I agree with. And indeed they are sufficient! It is always good to base your prayer on prayers coming from the mouth of the Lord. In this matter those who warn us are right, for if our nature were not so weak and our devotion so lukewarm there wouldn't be any need to compose other prayers, nor would there be need for other books. As I say, I am speaking to souls that cannot recollect their minds in the thought of other mysteries because they think some kind of skill is needed, and there are some minds so ingenious that they're never satisfied with any of their thoughts. So it seems to me now that I should proceed by setting down some points here about the beginning, the means, and the end of prayer. I shall not take time to dwell on more sublime things. No one will be able to take from you these books (the Our Father and the Hail Mary), and if you are eager to learn you won't need anything else provided you are humble. I have always been fond of the words of the Gospels [that have come from that most sacred mouth in the way they were said] and found more recollection in them than in very cleverly written books. I especially had no desire to read these books if the author was not well approved. If, then, I draw near to this Master of wisdom, He will perhaps teach me some worthwhile thoughts that will please you.
I don't say that I'm going to write a commentary on these divine prayers, for I wouldn't dare. Many commentaries have been written; and even if they hadn't been, it would be absurd for me to write one. But I will mention some thoughts on the words of the Our Father. For sometimes, with regard to many books, it seems we lose devotion in the very exercise in which it is so important for us to have devotion. Clearly, when a master teaches something he gets to love his disciple and is pleased if that which he teaches satisfies his pupil, and he helps him a great deal to learn the material. The heavenly Master will do the same with us.
5. Hence, don't pay any attention to the fears they raise or to the picture of the dangers they paint for you. Wouldn't it be nice if while desiring to procure a great treasure I should want to walk without danger along a path where there are so many robbers. It would be a pleasant world if they would let you get the treasure in peace. But for a penny's worth of self-interest they will go many nights without sleep and disturb you in body and soul. For when you are about to gain the treasure -- or steal it, since the Lord says that the violent take it away -- by a royal road and by a safe road, the road chosen by our King and all His elect and saints, they will tell you that there are so many dangers and so many things to fear. How many more dangers are there for those who think they obtain this good without following a road?
6. Oh, my daughters! There are incomparably more dangers for such persons, but people don't know about them until they bump blindly into the true danger when there is no one to give them a hand; and they lose the water entirely without drinking either little or much -- neither from a small pool nor from a stream.
So you see, how will one journey without a drop of this water on a road where there are so many struggles? It is clear that when it is needed most they will not have it and will die of thirst. Because whether we like it or not, my daughters, we must all journey toward this fount, even though in different ways. Well, believe me; and don't let anyone deceive you by showing you a road other than that of prayer.
7. I am not speaking now about whether the prayer should be mental or vocal for everyone. In your case, I say that you need both. Such is the duty of religious. Should anyone tell you that prayer is dangerous, consider him the real danger and run from him. Don't forget this counsel, for perhaps you will need it. There will be danger in not having humility and the other virtues. But that the way of prayer be a way of danger -- God would never will that. It seems the devil has invented these fears, and so he has been skillful, apparently, in making some who have practiced prayer fall away.
8. And see how blind the world is, for they fail to consider the many thousands who have fallen into heresies and great evils because they didn't practice prayer but engaged in distractions. And if in order to carry on his work better the devil has caused, among this multitude of persons, some of those who practiced prayer to fall, he has caused as much fear in others about virtuous things. Those who take this reasoning as a refuge in order to free themselves should be on their guard, for they are running away from good in order to free themselves from evil. Never have I seen such a wicked contrivance; it really seems to come from the devil. O my Lord, defend Yourself! See how they understand Your words in reverse. Don't permit such weaknesses in Your servants. [Hold fast, daughters, for they cannot take from you the Our Father and the Hail Mary.]
9. There's one great blessing: you will always find some who will help you, because this is a characteristic of the real servant of God to whom His Majesty has given light concerning the true way; in the midst of these fears the desire not to give up increases within him. He understands clearly where the devil is going to strike, flees from him and crushes his head. The devil feels more regret over this than he does satisfaction over the many pleasures that others give them. In a time of disturbance, of discord caused by the devil -- for it seems all are following him half blind because they do so under the guise of zeal -- God will raise up someone to open the eyes of these half-blind people and tell them that the devil has placed a cloud in front of them to prevent their seeing the way. Oh, the greatness of God, for sometimes one or two men alone can do more when they speak the truth than many together! Little by little, souls discover again the way; God gives them courage. If they are told there is danger in prayer, one of these servants of God will strive, if not in words then in deeds, to make known how good prayer is. If they are told that frequent Communion is not good, he will receive more frequently. Thus, since there are one or two who fearlessly do what is best, the Lord at once begins to win back gradually the ground that was lost.
10. Therefore, Sisters, give up these fears; never pay attention in like matters to the opinion of the crowd. Behold, these are not the times to believe everyone; believe only those who you see are walking in conformity with Christ's life. Try to preserve a pure conscience, humility, and contempt for all worldly things; believe firmly what Holy Mother Church holds, and you can be sure you will be walking along a good path.
Leave aside, as I said, your fears where there is no reason for fear. If someone should raise these fears to you, humbly explain the path to him. Tell him you have a rule that commands you to pray unceasingly -- for that's what it commands us -- and that you have to keep it. If they tell you that the prayer should be vocal, ask, for the sake of more precision, if in vocal prayer the mind and heart must be attentive to what you say. If they answer "yes" -- for they cannot answer otherwise -- you will see how they admit that you are forced to practice mental prayer and even experience contemplation if God should give it to you by such a means.
