CHAPTER 22
 
Explains what mental prayer is.
 
1. Realize, daughters, that the nature of mental prayer isn't determined by whether or not the mouth is closed. If while speaking I thoroughly understand and know that I am speaking with God and I have greater awareness of this than I do of the words I'm saying, mental and vocal prayer are joined. If, however, others tell you that you are speaking with God while you are reciting the Our Father and at the same time in fact thinking of the world, then I have nothing to say. But if you are to be speaking, as is right, with so great a Lord, it is good that you consider whom you are speaking with as well as who you are, at least if you want to be polite. How can you call the king "your highness" or know the ceremonies to be observed in addressing a highest ranking nobleman if you do not clearly understand what his position is and what your is? For it is in conformity with these facts that you must show respect, and in conformity with custom -- because you also need to know even the customs. If you don't know them, you will be sent away as a simpleton and will fail to negotiate anything. [And what's more, if you don't know these things well, you will need to find out and even rehearse what you must say. Once it happened to me that, not having been accustomed to speaking with lords and ladies I had to speak with someone who was to be addressed as your ladyship; and so they had to show me how to say it. Since I am dull and was not used to these titles, I didn't get it right when the time came. I decided to tell her what happened and, laughing at myself, asked her to allow me to address her with the ordinary form "you;" and so I did.]
Well, what is this, my Lord? What is this, my Emperor? How can it be tolerated? You are King forever, my God; Your kingdom is not a borrowed one. When in the Creed the words, "and His kingdom will have no end," are said, it is almost always a special delight for me. I praise You, Lord, and bless You forever; in sum, Your kingdom will last forever. Well then, may You never permit, Lord, that anyone who is about to speak to You consider it good to do so only vocally.
2. What is this, Christians, that you say mental prayer isn't necessary? Do you understand yourselves? Indeed, I don't think you do, and so you desire that we all be misled. You don't know what mental prayer is, or how vocal prayer should be recited, or what contemplation is, for if you did you wouldn't on the on hand condemn what on the other hand you praise.
3. I shall always have to join mental prayer to vocal prayer -- when I remember -- so that others don't frighten you, daughters. I know how this criticism of mental prayer will end up, for I have suffered some trials in this matter, and thus I wouldn't want anyone to disturb you. It is harmful to walk on this road with fear. It is very important for you to know that you are on the right road. When a traveler is told that he has made a mistake and lost his way, he is made to go from one end to another, and all his searching for the way tires him, and he wastes time and arrives late.
Who can say that it is wrong, when we begin to recite the Hours or the rosary, to consider whom we are going to speak with, and who we are, so as to know how to speak with Him? Now I tell you, Sisters, if before you begin your vocal prayer you do the great deal that must be done in order to understand these two points well, you will be spending a good amount of time in mental prayer. Yes, indeed, for we must not approach a conversation with a prince as negligently as we do one with a farm worker, or with some poor thing like ourselves for whom any manner of address is all right.
4. It is only right that we consider these two points since, because of his humility, this King listens to me and lets me approach Him; and His guards do not throw me out, even though as an uneducated person I don't know how to speak to Him. The angels who assist Him know well the attitude of their King, for He delights more in the unpolished manners of a humble shepherd who He realizes would say more if he knew more than He does in the talk of very wise and learned men, however elegant their discourse, if they don't walk in humility. But just because He is good doesn't mean that we should be rude. At least, in order to thank Him for the bad odor He must endure in consenting to allow one like myself to come near Him, we should strive to be aware of His purity and of who He is. It's true that upon approaching Him one understands immediately, just as with lords here below; for when they tell us who their father was and about the millions they get in rent and of their title of dignity, there's no more to know. In fact, here below people in paying honor don't take into account the persons themselves, however much these persons may deserve the honor, but their wealth.
5. O miserable world! Praise God very much, daughters, because you have left something so wretched, where men pay attention not to what they have within themselves but to what their tenant farmers and vassals have; and if these men lack subordinates then no honor is paid them. It's something amusing to relax over when you all have to take some recreation. For this is a good pastime: to notice how blindly those who are in the world spend their time.
6. Oh, our Emperor, supreme Power, supreme Goodness, Wisdom itself, without beginning, without end, without any limit to Your works; they are infinite and incomprehensible, a fathomless sea of marvels, with a beauty containing all beauty, strength itself! Oh, God help me, who might possess here all human eloquence and wisdom together in order to know how to explain clearly -- insofar as is possible here below, because in this case all knowledge is equivalent to knowing nothing -- a number of the many things we can consider in order to have some knowledge of who this Lord and Good of ours is!
7. Yes, bring yourselves to consider and understand whom you are speaking with, or, as you approach, with whom you are about to speak. In a thousand lives we would never completely understand the way in which this Lord deserves that we speak with Him, for the angels tremble before Him. He commands all; He can do all; for Him, to will is to do. Well then, it is only right, daughters, that we try to delight in these grandeurs our Spouse possesses and that we understand whom we are wedded to and what kind of life we must live. Oh, God help me, here below before getting married a person will know the other party, who he is and what he possesses. We are already betrothed and before the wedding must be brought to His house. Here below they don't try to make those who are betrothed renounce such thoughts. Why should they try to prevent us from thinking about who this man is, who His Father is, what country He is going to bring me to, what good things He promises to give me, what His status is, how I can make Him happy, and in what ways I can please Him, and from studying how I can conform my way of life to His? Now if a woman is to be happily married, she must, according to the advice she receives, strive for this conformity even though her husband is a man of lowly estate.
8. Well, my Spouse, must they in everything pay less attention to You than to men? If paying more attention to You doesn't seem right to them, let them at least leave Your brides alone, for these latter must live their lives with You. Indeed, their life is a good one. If a spouse is so jealous that he doesn't want his bride to talk to anyone, it would be a fine thing if she didn't think about how she might please him in this matter and the reason she has for putting up with this jealousy and for wanting to avoid speaking with another since in him she has all that she could want!
This is mental prayer, my daughters: to understand these truths. If you should want to grow in understanding these things and pray vocally, well and good. You should not be thinking of other things while speaking with God, for doing so amounts to not knowing what mental prayer is. I believe the matter has been explained. May it please the Lord that we know how to put it into practice. Amen.

CHAPTER 23
 
Treats of how important it is for one who has begun the path of prayer not to turn back and speaks once more of the great value that lies in beginning with determination.
 
1. Well now, I say there are so many reasons why it is extremely important to begin with great determination that I would have to go on at much length if I mentioned them all. Sisters, I want to mention only two or three.
One is that if we resolve to give something, that is, this little care, to someone who has given so much to us and continually gives -- giving this little care is certainly to our advantage and we thereby gain so many wonderful things -- there is no reason for failing to give with complete determination. There's no reason for being like the lender who gives something with the intention of getting it back again. Lending doesn't seem to me to amount to giving; rather, there is always some displeasure felt by the borrower when the object is taken back, especially if he needs it and has already used it as his own, or if the lender is his friend, or if the borrower has given the lender many gifts without any self-seeking. The borrower would rightly think there was very little love in the lender who won't even let him keep a little thing, not even as a sign of love.
2. What bride is there who in receiving many valuable jewels from her bridegroom will refuse to give him even a ring, not because of what it is worth, for everything belongs to him, but to give it as a pledge that she will be his until death? Does this Lord deserve less, that we should we mock Him by giving and then taking back the trifle that we gave Him? But this little bit of time that we resolve to give Him, which we spend on ourselves and on someone who will not thank us for it, let us give to Him, since we desire to do so, with our thoughts free of other things and unoccupied by them. And let us be wholly determined never to take it back from Him, neither because of trials on this account, for because of contradictions, nor because of dryness. I should consider the time of prayer as not belonging to me and think that He can ask it of me in justice when I do not want to give it wholly to Him.
3. In saying "wholly," I do not mean that abandoning it for a day or for a few days on account of some just occupations or because of some indisposition is the equivalent of taking it back. Let the intention be firm; my God is not at all touchy; He doesn't bother about trifling things. Thus you will have something to be grateful for; this intention amounts to giving something. As for others, for anyone who is not generous but so stingy that he doesn't have the spirit of giving, it is enough for them to lend. In the end, one who lends does do something, and this Lord of ours takes everything into account. He adjusts Himself to our way of giving. In taking account of us, He is not at all petty, but generous. However great our debt may be, He finds it easy to pardon; but when there is a question of His repaying us, He's so careful that you need have no fear. Just the raising of our eyes in remembrance of Him will have its reward.
4. Another reason for beginning with determination is that the devil will not then have so free a hand to tempt. He's extremely afraid of determined souls, for he has experienced the great harm they do him. And all the harm he plans to do them turns out to their benefit and to that of others as well; and he comes out with a loss. But we should not be careless or trust in this fact, for we are dealing with traitors, and they don't dare attack so often those who are well prepared; they are very cowardly. But if the devil should see carelessness, he would do great harm. And if he knows that someone is changeable and unstable in being good and not strongly determined to persevere, he will keep after him day and night; he will cause fears and never-ending obstacles. I know this very well through experience, and that's why I'm able to say, and do say, that no one knows how important determination is.
5. The other reason for beginning with determination is -- and it is very much to the point -- that the person who does so struggles more courageously. He knows that come what may he will not turn back. As in the case of one who is in a battle, he knows that if he is conquered they won't spare him his life and that if he doesn't die in battle he will die afterward. He struggles with greater determination and wants to fight like a desperado -- as they say -- and he doesn't fear the blows so much, because he is convinced of how important victory is and that for him to conquer is to live. It's also necessary to begin with the assurance that if we don't let ourselves be conquered we will obtain our goal; this without a doubt, for no matter how small the gain, one will end up being very rich. Don't be afraid that the Lord will leave you to die of thirst, for He calls us to drink from this fount. I have already said this and would like to say it many times, for the devil intimidates persons who don't yet fully know the goodness of the Lord through experience, even though they know it through faith. But it is a great thing to have experienced the friendship and favor He shows toward those who journey on this road and how He takes care of almost all the expenses.
6. I'm not surprised that those who have not experienced this want the assurance of some gain for themselves. Well, you already know there is the hundredfold even in this life and that the Lord says, "ask, and you will receive." If you don't believe His Majesty in the sections of His gospel that insure this gain, it will be of little benefit, Sisters, for me to break my head in trying to tell you about it. Nevertheless, I say that should anyone have some doubt little would be lost in trying the journey of prayer; for this journey brings with it the following good: more is given than is asked for, beyond what we could desire. This is absolutely true; I know. And those of you who know it by experience, through the goodness of God, can be my witnesses.

CHAPTER 24
 
How vocal prayer must be recited with perfection, and mental prayer joined with it.
 
1. Now, then, let us speak again to those souls I mentioned that cannot recollect or tie their minds down in mental prayer or engage in reflection. Let's not mention here by name these two things, since you are not meant to follow such a path. As a matter of fact there are many persons seemingly terrified by the mere term "mental prayer" or "contemplation," and perhaps one of these might come to this house, for as I have also said not everyone walks by the same path.
2. Well what I now want to counsel you about (I can even say teach you, because as a Mother, having the office of prioress, I'm allowed to teach) is how you must pray vocally, for it's only right that you should understand what you're saying. And because it can happen that those who are unable to think about God may also find long prayers tiring, I don't want to concern myself with these. But I will speak of those prayers we are obliged as Christians to recite (such as, the Our Father and the Hail Mary) so that people won't be able to say of us that we speak and don't understand what we're speaking about -- unless we think it is enough for us to follow the practice in which merely pronouncing the words is sufficient. I'm not concerned with whether this is sufficient or not; learned men will explain [the matter to those persons to whom God gives light to ask the question. And I'm not meddling with what doesn't belong to our state.] What I would like us to do, daughters, is refuse to be satisfied with merely pronouncing the words. For when I say, "I believe," it seems to me right that I should know and understand what I believe. And when I say, "Our Father," it will be an act of love to understand who this Father of ours is and who the Master is who taught us this prayer.
3. If you reply that you already know this and that there is no reason to recall it, you are wrong. There is a large difference in teachers; but it is even a great misfortune if we forget those who teach us here below. Especially, if they are saints and spiritual masters and we are good disciples, it is impossible to forget them [but we love them very much and even take pride in them and often speak to them.] Well, God never allows us to forget the Master who taught us this prayer, and with so much love and desire that it benefit us. He wants us to remember Him often when we say the prayer, even though because of our weakness we do not remember him always.
4. Now with regard to vocal prayer you already know that His Majesty teaches that it be recited in solitude. This is what He always did when He prayed, and not out of any need of His own but for our instruction. It has already been mentioned that one cannot speak simultaneously to God and to the world; this would amount to nothing more than reciting the prayer while listening to what is being said elsewhere or to letting the mind wander and making no effort to control it. There can be exceptions at times either because of bad humors -- especially if the person is melancholic -- or because of faint feelings in the head so that all efforts become useless. Or it can happen that God will permit days of severe temptation in his servants for their greater good. And though in their affliction they are striving to be quiet, they cannot even be attentive to what they are saying, no matter how hard they try; nor will the intellect settle down in anything, but by the disordered way it goes about, it will seem to be in a frenzy.
5. Whoever experiences the affliction these distractions cause will see that they are not his fault; he should not grow anxious, which makes things worse, or tire himself trying to put order into something that at the time doesn't have any, that is, his mind. He should just pray as best he can; or even not pray, but like a sick person strive to bring some relief to his soul; let him occupy himself in other works of virtue. This advice now is for persons who are careful and who have understood that they must not speak simultaneously to both God and the world.
What we ourselves can do is to strive to be alone; and please God it will suffice, as I say, that we understand to whom we are speaking and the answer the Lord makes to our petitions. Do you think He is silent? Even though we do not hear Him, He speaks well to the heart when we beseech Him from the heart.
And it is good for us to consider that He taught this prayer to each of us and that He is showing it to us; the teacher is never so far from his pupil that he has to shout, but he is very close. I want you to understand that it is good for you, if you are to recite the Our Father well, to remain at the side of the Master who taught this prayer to you.
6. You will say that doing so involves reflection and that you neither can nor want to pray any other way but vocally; for there are also impatient persons who like to avoid any suffering. Since such individuals do not have the habit, it is difficult for them to recollect their minds in the beginning; and so as to avoid a little fatigue, they say they neither can nor know how to do anything else than pray vocally.
You are right in saying that this vocal prayer is now in fact mental prayer. But I tell you that surely I don't know how mental prayer can be separated from vocal prayer if the vocal prayer is to be recited well with an understanding of whom we are speaking to. It is even an obligation that we strive to pray with attention. Please God that with these remedies we shall recite the Our Father well and not end up in some other irrelevant thing. I have experienced this sometimes, and the best remedy I find is to strive to center the mind upon the one to whom the words are addressed. So, be patient and strive to make a habit out of something that is so necessary [if you are to be good nuns, and even pray as good Christians, in my opinion.]
