CHAPTER 31
 
Continues on the same subject. Explains the nature of the prayer of quiet. Gives some advice for those who experience it. This chapter should be carefully noted.
 
1. Well, daughters, I nonetheless want to explain this prayer of quiet. I have heard talk about it, or the Lord had given me understanding of it, perhaps, that I might tell you of it [and that others may praise Him; although since I have written about it elsewhere, as I said, I will not give lengthy explanations but just say something.] In this prayer it seems the Lord begins, as I have said, to show that He hears our petition. He begins now to give us His kingdom here below so that we may truly praise and hallow His name and strive that all persons do so.
2. This prayer is something supernatural, something we cannot procure through our own efforts. In it the soul enters into peace or, better, the Lord puts it at peace by His presence, as he did to the just Simeon, so that all the faculties are calmed. The soul understands in another way, very foreign to the way it understands through the exterior senses, that it is now close to its God and that not much more would be required for it to become one with Him in union. This is not because it sees Him with the eyes either of the body or of the soul. The just Simeon didn't see any more than the glorious, little, poor child. For by the way the child was clothed and by the few people that were in the procession, Simeon could have easily judged the babe to be the son of poor people rather than the Son of our heavenly Father. But the child Himself made Simeon understand. And this is how the soul understands here, although not with as much clarity. For the soul, likewise, fails to understand how it understands. But it sees it is in the kingdom, at least near the King who will give the kingdom to the soul. And seemingly the soul has so much reverence that it doesn't even dare ask for this. The state resembles an interior and exterior swoon; for the exterior man (or so that you will understand me better, I mean the body [for some simpleton will come along who won't know what "interior" and "exterior" means]) doesn't want any activity. But like one who has almost reached the end of his journey he wants to rest so as to be better able to continue; in this rest his strength for the journey is doubled.
3. A person feels the greatest delight in his body and a great satisfaction in his soul. He feels so happy merely with being close to the fount that he is satisfied even without drinking. It doesn't seem there is anything else for him to desire. The faculties are still; they wouldn't want to be busy; everything else seems to hinder them from loving. But they are not completely lost; they can think of who it is they are near, for two of them are free. The will is the one that is captive here. If there is some sorrow that can be experienced while in this state, that sorrow comes from a realization that the will must return to the state of being free. The intellect wouldn't want to understand more than one thing; nor would the memory want to be occupied with anything else. Persons in this prayer see that only this one thing is necessary, and everything else disturbs them. They don't want the body to move because it seems they would thereby lose that peace; thus they don't dare stir. It pains them to speak; in their saying "Our Father" just once a whole hour passes. They are so close that they see they are understanding as though through signs. They are within the palace, near the King, and they see that He is beginning to give them here His kingdom. It doesn't seem to them that they are in the world, nor would they want to see or hear about anything other than their God. Nothing pains them, nor does it seem anything ever will. In sum, while this prayer lasts they are so absorbed and engulfed with the satisfaction and delight they experience within themselves that they do not remember there is more to desire; they would eagerly say with St. Peter: "Lord, let us build three dwelling places here."
4. Sometimes in this prayer of quiet the Lord grants another favor which is very difficult to understand if there is not a great deal of experience. But if there is some experience, the one who receives it will immediately understand. It will be a great consolation for you to know what it is, and I believe God often grants this favor together with the other one. When this quiet is great and lasts for a long while, it seems to me that the will wouldn't be able to remain so long in that peace if it weren't bound to something. For it may happen that we will go about with this satisfaction for a day or two and will not understand ourselves -- I mean those who experience it -- and they definitely see that they are not wholly in what they are doing, but that the best part is lacking, that is, the will. The will, in my opinion, is then united with its God, and leaves the other faculties free to be occupied in what is for His service -- and they then have much more ability for this. But in worldly matters, these faculties are dull and at times as though in a stupor.
5. This is a great favor for those to whom the Lord grants it; the active and the contemplative lives are joined. The faculties all serve the Lord together: the will is occupied in its work and contemplation without knowing how; the other two faculties serve in the work of Martha. Thus Martha and Mary walk together.
I know someone whom the Lord often placed in this state. She didn't know what to make of it and asked a great contemplative. He answered that the experience was very possible, that it had happened to him. Thus, I think that because the soul is so satisfied in this prayer of quiet the faculty of the will remains more continually united with Him who alone can satisfy it.
6. I think it would be good here to give some counsels for those of you, Sisters, whom the Lord, solely through His goodness, has brought here, for I know there are some of you.
The first is that since they see themselves in that contentment and do not know how it came on them -- at least they see they cannot obtain it by themselves -- they experience this temptation: they think they'll be able to hold on to that satisfaction and they don't even dare take a breath. This is foolish, for just as there's nothing we can do to make the sun rise, there's little we can do to keep it from setting. This prayer is no longer our work, for it's something very supernatural and something very much beyond our power to acquire by ourselves. The best way to hold on to this favor is to understand clearly that we can neither bring it about nor remove it; we can only receive it with gratitude, as most unworthy of it; and this not with many words, but by raising our eyes to Him, as the publican did.
7. It is good to find more solitude so as to make room for the Lord and allow His Majesty to work as though with something belonging to Him. At most, a gentle word from time to time is sufficient, as in the case of one who blows on a candle to enkindle it again when it begins to die out. But if the candle is burning, blowing on it will in my opinion serve no other purpose than to put it out. I say that the blowing should be gentle lest the will be distracted by the intellect busying itself with many words.
8. And note well, friends, this counsel that I now wish to give, for you'll often see that you'll be unable to manage these other two faculties. It happens that the soul will be in the greatest quiet and the intellect will be so distracted that it won't seem that the quiet is present in the intellect's house. It seems to the intellect, during that time, that it is nowhere else than in a stranger's house, as a guest, and seeking other dwelling places because the house it's in doesn't satisfy it and it knows little about how to remain stable. Perhaps it's only my intellect that's like this, and others' intellects are not. I am speaking about myself, for sometimes I want to die in that I cannot cure this wandering of the intellect. At other times I think it takes up residence in its own house and accompanies the will. It's a wonderful thing when all three faculties are in accord. It's like what happens between two married people: if they love each other, the one wants what the other wants. But if the husband is unhappily married, it's easy to see what disturbance he'll cause his wife. Thus when the will finds itself in this quiet [and note well this counsel, for the matter is important], it shouldn't pay any more attention to the intellect than it would to a madman. For should it want to keep the intellect near itself, it will necessarily have to be somewhat disturbed and disquieted. And in this state of prayer everything will then amount to working without any further gain but with a loss of what the Lord was giving the will without its own work.
9. And notice carefully this comparison [for the Lord put it in my mind while I was at prayer]; it seems to me very appropriate: the soul is like an infant that still nurses when at its mother's breast, and the mother without her babe's effort to suckle put the milk in its mouth in order to give it delight. So it is here; for without effort of the intellect the will is loving, and the Lord desires that the will, without thinking about the matter, understand that it is with Him and that it does no more than swallow the milk His Majesty places in its mouth, and enjoy that sweetness. For the will knows that it is the Lord who is granting that favor. And the will rejoices in its enjoyment. It doesn't desire to understand how it enjoys the favor or what it enjoys; but it forgets itself during that time, for the One who is near it will not forget to observe what is fitting for it. If the will goes out to fight with the intellect so as to give a share of the experience, by drawing the intellect after itself, it cannot do so at all; it will be forced to let the milk fall from its mouth and lose that divine nourishment.
10. This is the way this prayer of quiet is different from that prayer in which the entire soul is united with God, for then the soul doesn't even go through the process of swallowing this divine food. Without its understanding how, the Lord places the milk within it. In this prayer of quiet it seems that He wants it to work a little, although so gently that it almost doesn't feel its effort. [Whoever experiences this prayer will understand clearly what I'm saying if after having read this he reflects on it carefully; and let him consider how important the matter is. If he doesn't experience the prayer, this will seem like gibberish.] That which torments the will is the intellect. The intellect doesn't cause this torment when there is union of all three faculties, for He who created them suspends them. With the joy He gives them He keeps them all occupied without their knowing or understanding how. Thus, as I say, they feel this prayer within themselves, a quiet and great contentment of the will, without being able to discern what it is specifically. Yet the soul easily discerns that it is far different from earthly satisfactions and that ruling the world with all its delights wouldn't be enough to make the soul feel that delight within itself. The delight is in the interior of the will, for the other consolations of life, it seems to me, are enjoyed in the exterior of the will, as in the outer bark, we might say. When the will sees itself in this degree of prayer so sublime (for the prayer is, as I have already said, very recognizably supernatural), it laughs at the intellect as at a fool when this intellect -- or mind, to explain myself better -- goes off to the more foolish things of the world. The will remains in its quietude, for the intellect will come and go. In this prayer the will is the ruler and the powerful one. It will draw the intellect after itself without your being disturbed. And if the will should desire to draw the intellect by force of arms, the strength it has against the intellect will be lost. This strength comes from eating and receiving that divine food. And neither the will nor the intellect will gain anything, but both will lose. As the saying goes, whoever tries to grasp too much loses everything; this it seems to me is what will happen here. Experience will enable one to understand, for I wouldn't be surprised if to anyone who doesn't have this experience what I've said would seem very obscure and unnecessary. But I've already mentioned that with a little experience one will understand it, be able to benefit from it, and will praise the Lord because He was pleased that I managed to explain it here.
11. Now, then, let's conclude by saying that to the soul placed in this prayer it seems the Eternal Father has already here below granted its petition for His kingdom. Oh, blessed request, in which, without realizing it, we ask for so much good! What a blessed way of asking! For this reason, Sisters, I want us to look at how we recite this prayer, the Our Father, and all other vocal prayers. For when this favor is granted by God, we shall forget the things of the world; when the Lord of the world arrives He casts out everything else. I don't say that all those who experience this prayer must by necessity be completely detached from the world. At least, I would like them to know what is lacking and that they humble themselves and try to go on detaching themselves from everything; if they don't, they will remain in this state. A soul to whom God gives such pledges has a sign that He wants to give it a great deal; if not impeded through its own fault, it will advance very far. But if the Lord sees that after He places the kingdom of heaven in the soul's house this soul turns to earthly things, He will not only fail to show it the secrets there are in His kingdom but will seldom grant it this favor, and then for just a short space of time.
12. Now it could be that I am mistaken in this matter, but I see and know that this is what happens, and in my opinion this is why there are not many more spiritual persons. When individuals do not respond by service that is in conformity with so great a favor, when they do not prepare themselves to receive it again, but take back their wills from the hands of the Lord who already possesses these wills as His own, and set them upon base things, the Lord goes in search of those who do love Him so as to give more to them. Yet He doesn't take away entirely what He has given, when one lives with a pure conscience. But there are persons -- and I have been one of them -- who make themselves deaf when the Lord, taking pity on them, gives them holy inspirations and light concerning the nature of things, and, in sum, gives this kingdom and places them in this prayer of quiet. For they are so fond of speaking and reciting many vocal prayers very quickly, like one who wants to get a job done, since they oblige themselves to recite these every day, that even though, as I say, the Lord places His kingdom in their hands, they do not receive it. But with their vocal prayers they think they are doing better, and they distract themselves from the prayer of quiet.
13. Do not do this, Sisters, but be on your guard when the Lord grants you this favor. Consider that you are losing a great treasure and that you do much more by saying one word of the Our Father from time to time than by rushing through the entire prayer many times. You are very close to the One you petition; He will not fail to hear you. And believe that herein lies the true praise and hallowing of His name. For now, as one who is in His house, you glorify the Lord and praise Him with more affection and desire; and it seems that you cannot fail to serve Him. [Thus I counsel you to be very careful in this matter because it is extremely important.]

CHAPTER 32
 
Discuss the words of the Our Father, Fiat voluntas tua sicut in caelo et in terra; the great deal a person does when he says them with full determination; and how well the Lord repays this. [So I counsel you to be attentive because the matter is very important.]
 
1. Now that our Good Master has asked, and taught us to ask, for something so highly valuable that it includes everything we can desire here below and that He has granted us so wonderful a favor as to make us His brothers, let us see what He desires us to give His Father, and how He offers this gift for us and what He asks of us. For it is right that we somehow serve Him in return for such great favors. O good Jesus! What You give on our behalf in return for what You requested for us is no small thing, although it really amounts to nothing when compared to the greatness of the Lord and what we owe Him. But certainly, my Lord, You do not leave us empty-handed when we give You everything we can -- I mean if we really give it, as we say we will.
2. "Your will be done on earth as it is in heaven." You did well, good Master of ours, to make this petition so that we might accomplish what You give on our behalf. For certainly, Lord, if You hadn't made the petition, the task would seem to me impossible. But when Your Father does what You ask Him by giving us His kingdom here on earth, I know that we shall make Your words come true by giving what You give for us. For once the earth has become heaven, the possibility is there for Your will to be done in me. But if the earth hasn't -- and earth as wretched and barren as mine -- I don't know, Lord, how it will be possible. It is indeed a great thing, that which You offer!
3. When I think of this, I am amused by persons who don't dare ask for trials from the Lord, for they suppose that in doing so they will be given them at once. I'm not speaking of those who fail to do so out of humility, thinking they will be incapable of suffering them; although I myself hold that He, who gives these persons the love to ask for these means, which are so harsh, in order that they may show their love, will give them the capacity to suffer them. I would like to question those who fear to ask for trials, lest these be given them at once, about what they say when they beseech the Lord to do His will in them. Perhaps they say the words just to say what everyone else is saying but not so that His will be done. To do this, Sisters, would not be right. Consider that Jesus acts here as our ambassador and that He has desired to intervene between us and His Father, and at no small cost of His own. It would not be right for us to fail to do what He has offered on our behalf; if we don't want to do it we shouldn't say these words.
4. Now let me put it in another way. Look, daughters, His will must be done whether we like this or not, and it will be done in heaven and on earth. Believe me, take my advice, and make a virtue of necessity. O my Lord, what a great comfort this is for me, that you didn't want the fulfillment of Your will to depend on a will as wretched as mine! May You be blessed forever, and may all things praise You! Your name be glorified forever! I'd be in a fine state, Lord, if it were up to me as to whether or not Your will were to be done! Now I freely give mine to You, even though I do so at a time in which I'm not free of self-interest. For I have felt and have had great experience of the gain that comes from freely abandoning my will to Yours. O friends, what a great gain there is here! Oh, what a great loss there is when we do not carry out what we offer to the Lord in the Our Father!
5. Before I tell you about what is gained, I want to explain the great deal you offer so that afterward you won't take back what you gave, claiming that you hadn't understood. Don't be like some religious who do nothing but promise; and when we don't follow through, we make an excuse saying we didn't understand what we were promising. And this could be so, because to say that we abandon our will to another's will seems very easy until through experience we realize that this is the hardest thing one can do if one does it as it should be done. But superiors are not always strict in leading us since they see we are weak. And at times they lead both the weak and the strong in the same way. With the Lord, such is not the case; He knows what each one can suffer. He does not delay in doing His will in anyone He sees has strength.
6. Well, I want to advise you and remind you what His will is. Don't fear that it means He will give you riches, or delights, or honors, or all these earthly things. His love for you is not that small, and He esteems highly what you give Him. He wants to repay you well, for He gives you His kingdom while you are still alive. Do you want to know how He answers those who say these words to Him sincerely? Ask His glorious Son, who said them while praying in the Garden. Since they were said with such determination and complete willingness, see if the Father's will wasn't done fully in Him through the trials, sorrows, injuries, and persecutions He suffered until His life came to an end through death on a cross.
7. Well, see here, daughters, what He gave to the one He loved most. By that we understand what His will is. For these are His gifts in this world. He gives according to the love He bears us: to those He loves more, He gives more of these gifts; to those He loves less, He gives less. And He gives according to the courage He sees in each and the love each has for His Majesty. He will see that whoever loves Him much will be able to suffer much for Him; whoever loves Him little will be capable of little. I myself hold that the measure for being able to bear a large or small cross is love. So, Sisters, if you love Him, strive that what you say to the Lord may not amount to mere polite words; strive to suffer what His Majesty desires you to suffer. For, otherwise, when you give your will, it would be like showing a jewel to another, making a gesture to give it away, and asking that he take it; but when he extends his hand to accept it, you pull yours back and hold on tightly to the jewel.
8. This is no way to mock Him who was the butt of so much mockery for our sakes. Even if there were no other reason, it would not be right to mock Him so often; the number of times we say the Our Father is not small. Let's give Him the jewel once and for all, no matter how many times we have tried to give it before. The truth is that He rewards us beforehand so that we might give it to Him. [Oh, God help me, how obvious it is that my good Jesus knows us! For He doesn't say at the outset that we should give this will to the Lord, but first reveals that we will be well paid for this little service and that the Lord wants us to benefit a great deal by it. Even in this life He begins to reward us, as I shall now say.] Those in the world will be doing enough if they truly have the determination to do His will. You, daughters, will express this determination by both saying and doing, by both words and deeds, as indeed it seems we religious do. But at times we not only commit ourselves to giving the jewel but place it in His hand, only to take it back again. We are quick to be generous, but afterward so stingy that it would have been more fruitful, in part, if we had delayed in giving.
9. Because everything I have advised you about in this book is directed toward the complete gift of ourselves to the Creator, the surrender of our wills to His, and detachment from creatures -- and you have understood how important this is -- I'm not going to say any more about the matter; but I will explain why our good Master teaches us to say the words mentioned above, as one who knows the many things we gain by rendering this service to His eternal Father. For we are preparing ourselves that we may quickly reach the end of our journey and drink the living water from the fount we mentioned. Unless we give our wills entirely to the Lord so that in everything pertaining to us He might do what conforms with His will, we will never be allowed to drink from this fount. Drinking from it is perfect contemplation, that which you told me to write about.
10. In this contemplation, as I have already written, we don't do anything ourselves. Neither do we labor, nor do we bargain, nor is anything else necessary -- because everything else is an impediment and hindrance -- than to say fiat voluntas tua: Your will, Lord, be done in me in every way and manner that You, my Lord, want. If You want it to be done with trials, strengthen me and let them come; if with persecutions, illnesses, dishonors, and a lack of life's necessities, here I am; I will not turn away, my Father, nor is it right that I turn my back on You. Since Your Son gave You this will of mine in the name of all, there's no reason for any lack on my part. But grant me the favor of Your kingdom that I may do Your will, since He asked for this kingdom for me, and use me as You would Your own possession, in conformity with Your will.
11. O my Sisters, what strength lies in this gift! It does nothing less, when accompanied by the necessary determination, than draw the Almighty so that He becomes one with our lowliness, transforms us into Himself, and effects a union of the Creator with the creature. Behold whether or not you are well paid and have a good Master; since He knows how the love of His Father can be obtained, He teaches us how and by what means we must serve Him.
12. And the more our deeds show that these are not merely polite words, all the more does the Lord bring us to Himself and raise the soul from itself and all earthly things so as to make it capable of receiving great favors, for He never finishes repaying this service in the present life. He esteems it so highly that we do not ourselves know how to ask for ourselves, and His Majesty never tires of giving. Not content with having made this soul one with Himself, He begins to find His delight in it, reveal His secrets, and rejoice that it know what it has gained and something of what He will give it. He makes it lose these exterior senses so that nothing will occupy it. This is rapture. And he begins to commune with the soul in so intimate a friendship that He not only gives it back its own will but gives it His. For in so great a friendship the Lord takes joy in putting the soul in command, as they say, and He does what it asks since it does His will. And He does this even better than the soul itself could, for He is powerful and does whatever He wants and never stops wanting this.
13. The poor soul cannot do what it desires even though it may want to; nor can it give anything save what is given. This is its greatest wealth: the more it serves, the more indebted it remains. It often grows weary seeing itself subject to so many difficulties, impediments, and fetters, which result from dwelling in the prison of this body. It would want to repay something of what it owes. To grow weary is quite foolish; for even though one does what's in one's power, what can those of us repay who, as I say, don't have anything save what we have received? All we can do is know ourselves and what we are capable of, which is to give our will, and give it completely. Everything else encumbers the soul brought here by the Lord and causes it harm rather than benefit. Only humility can do something, a humility not acquired by the intellect, but by a clear perception that comprehends in a moment the truth one would be unable to grasp in a long time through the work of the imagination about what a trifle we are and how very great God is.
14. I give you one counsel: that you don't think that through your own strength or efforts you can arrive, for reaching this stage is beyond our power; if you try to reach it, the devotion you have will grow cold. But with simplicity and humility, which will achieve everything, say: fiat voluntas tua.

CHAPTER 33
 
Deals with the great need we have that the Lord give us what we ask for in these words of the Our Father: Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie.
 
1. As I have said, Jesus understands what a difficult thing it is He offers for us. He knows our weakness, that we often show we do not understand what the Lord's will is. We are weak and He is merciful. He knows that a means was necessary. He saw it would not be in any way to our benefit if we failed to give what He gave, because all our gain lies in giving this. He saw that doing the Father's will was difficult. If we tell a rich person living in luxury that it is God's will that he be careful and use moderation at table so that others might at least have bread to eat, for they are dying of hunger, he will bring up a thousand reasons for not understanding this save in accordance with his own selfish purposes. If we tell a backbiter that it is God's will that he love his neighbor as himself, he will become impatient and no reason will suffice to make him understand. We can tell a religious who has grown accustomed to freedom and comfort that he should remember his obligation to give good example and keep in mind that when he says these words they be not just words but be put into practice since he has promised them under oath; and that it is God's will that he be faithful to his vows and that he should note that if he gives scandal he is acting very contrary to them, even though he may not be breaking them entirely; and that since he has promised poverty, he should observe it without subterfuge, for this is what the Lord wills. But it is just useless to insist nowadays with some of them. What would happen if the Lord had not provided for us with the remedy He gave? There would have been only a very few who would have carried out these words He spoke for us to the Father, fiat voluntas tua.
Now then, once Jesus saw the need, He sought out a wonderful means by which to show the extreme of His love for us, and in His own name and in that of His brothers He made the following petition: "Give us this day, Lord, our daily bread."
Let us understand, Sisters, for the love of God, what our good Master is asking for; it is a matter of life and death not to pass over these words hastily. Consider what you have given as very little since you will receive so much.
2. Now I think -- unless one has a better opinion -- that Jesus observed what He had given for us, how important it was that we in turn give this, and the great difficulty there is in our doing so, as was said, since we are the way we are: inclined to base things and with so little love and courage that it was necessary for us to see His love and courage in order to be awakened -- and not just once but every day. After He saw all this, He must have resolved to remain with us here below. Since to do this was something so serious and important, He desired that it come from the hand of the Eternal Father. For even though they are one and He knew that what He did on earth God would do in heaven and consider good -- since His will and that of His Father were one -- the humility of Jesus was such that He wanted, as it were, to ask permission. He already knew that His Father loved Him and took His delight in Him. He well understood that He was asking for more in this request than He was in the others, for He knew beforehand the death they would make Him die and the dishonors and insults He would suffer.
3. Well, what father could there be, Lord, who in having given us his son, and a son like this who receives such treatment, would consent that he remain among us every day to suffer? Certainly no father, Lord, but Yours. You well know whom You are petitioning.
Oh, God help me, what great love from the Son and what great love from the Father! Yet I am not so surprised about Jesus, for since He had already said, fiat voluntas tua, He had to do that will, being who He is. Yes, for He is not like us! Since, then, He knows that He does it by loving us as Himself, He went about looking for ways of doing it with greater perfection, even though His fulfillment of this commandment was at a cost to Himself. But You, Eternal Father, how is it that You consented? Why do You desire to see Your Son every day in such wretched hands? Since You have already desired to see Him in these hands and given Your consent, You have seen how they treated Him. How can You in Your compassion now see Him insulted day after day? And how many insults will be committed today against this Most Blessed Sacrament! In how many enemies' hands must the Father see Him! How much irreverence from these heretics!
4. O eternal Lord! Why do You accept such a petition? Why do You consent to it? Don't look at His love for us, because in exchange for doing Your will perfectly, and doing it for us, He allows Himself to be crushed to pieces each day. It is for You, my Lord, to look after Him, since He will let nothing deter Him. Why must all our good come at His expense? Why does He remain silent before all and not know how to speak for Himself, but only for us? Well, shouldn't there be someone to speak for this most loving Lamb? [Allow me, Lord, to speak -- since You have willed to leave Him to our power -- and to beseech You since He so truly obeyed You and with so much love gave Himself to us.] I have noticed how in this petition alone He repeats the words: first He says and asks the Father to give us this daily bread, and then repeats, "give it to us this day, Lord," invoking the Father again. It's as though Jesus tells the Father that He is now ours since the Father has given Him to us to die for us; and asks that the Father not take Him from us until the end of the world; that He allow Him to serve each day. May this move your hearts, my daughters, to love your Spouse, for there is no slave who would willingly say he is a slave, and yet it seems that Jesus is honored to be one.
5. O Eternal Father! How much this humility deserves! What treasure do we have that could buy Your Son? The sale of Him, we already know, was for thirty pieces of silver. But to buy Him, no price is sufficient. Since by sharing in our nature He has become one with us here below -- and as Lord of His own will -- He reminds the Father that because He belongs to Him the Father in turn can give Him to us. And so He says, "our bread." He doesn't make any difference between Himself and us, but we make one by not giving ourselves up each day for His Majesty.
