CHAPTER 34
 
Continues on the same subject. The matter is very helpful with regard to the time immediately following reception of the most Blessed Sacrament.
 
1. In this petition the word "daily" seems to mean forever. Reflecting upon why after the word "daily" the Lord said "give us this day, Lord," that is, be ours every day, I've come to think that it is because here on earth we possess Him and also in heaven we will possess Him if we profit well by His company. He, in fact, doesn't remain with us for any other reason than to help, encourage, and sustain us in doing this will that we have prayed might be done in us.
2. In saying "this day," it seems to me, He is referring to one day: that which lasts as long as the world and no longer. And one day indeed! With regard to the unfortunate ones who will be condemned (who will not enjoy Him in the next life), it will not be the Lord's fault if they let themselves be conquered. He doesn't stop encouraging them until the battle is over. They will have no excuse or complaint to make to the Father for taking Him away when they most need Him. So the Son tells His Father that because there is no more than one day the Father should let Him pass it in servitude. Since the Father has already given us His Son and, just because He wanted to, sent Him into the world, the Son, just because He wants to, desires not to abandon us but to remain here with us, to the greater glory of His friends and the affliction of His enemies. He asks again for no more than to be with us this day only, because it is a fact that He has given us this most sacred bread forever. His Majesty gave us, as I have said, the manna and nourishment of His humanity that we might find Him at will and not die of hunger, save through our own fault. In no matter how many ways the soul may desire to eat, it will find delight and consolation in the most Blessed Sacrament. [I don't want to think the Lord had in mind the other bread that is used for our bodily needs and nourishment; nor would I want you to have that in mind. The Lord was in the most sublime contemplation (for whoever has reached such a stage has no more remembrance that he is in the world than if he were not, however much there may be to eat), and would He have placed so much emphasis on the petition that He as well as ourselves eat? It wouldn't make sense to me. He is teaching us to set our wills on heavenly things and to ask that we might begin enjoying Him from here below; and would He get us involved in something so base as asking to eat? As if He didn't know us! For once we start worrying about bodily needs, those of the soul will be forgotten! Well, we are such temperate people that we are satisfied by little and ask for little! On the contrary, the more He gives us the more we think we are lacking everything, even water. Let those, my daughters, who want more than is necessary ask for this material bread.] There is no need or trial or persecution that is not easy to suffer if we begin to enjoy the delight and consolation of this sacred bread.
3. Ask the Father, daughters, together with the Lord, to give you your Spouse "this day" so that you will not be seen in this world without Him. To temper such great happiness it's sufficient that He remain disguised in these accidents of bread and wine. This is torment enough for anyone who has no other love than Him nor any other consolation. Beg Him not to fail you, and to give you the dispositions to receive Him worthily.
4. Don't worry about the other bread, those of you who have sincerely surrendered yourselves to the will of God. I mean during these times of prayer when you should be dealing with more important things; there are other times for working and for earning your bread. [Have no fear that you will be in want of bread if you are not wanting in what you have said about the surrender of yourselves to God's will. And indeed, daughters, I say for myself, if I should maliciously fail in this surrender, as I have many other times, I would not beg that He give me this bread or anything else to eat. Let me die of hunger; why should I want life if with it I am daily gaining more of eternal death?] Carefully avoid wasting your thoughts at any time on what you will eat. Let the body work, for it is good that you work to sustain yourselves; let your soul be at rest. Leave this care, as has been amply pointed out, to your Spouse; He will care for you always.
5. Your attitude should be like that of a servant when he begins to serve. His care is about pleasing his master in everything. But the master is obliged to provide his servant with food as long as the servant is in the house and serves him, unless the master is so poor that he doesn't have enough either for himself or for his servant. In our case this isn't so; the Master always is, and will be, rich and powerful. Well, it wouldn't be right for the servant to go about asking for food when he knows that the master of the house takes care of providing it for him, and must do so. The master would rightly tell his servant to be occupied in serving and seeking ways to please the master, for the servant, by worrying about what isn't his own business, would be doing everything wrong.
Thus, Sisters, let whoever wants be concerned with asking for this bread. As for ourselves, let us ask the Eternal Father that we might merit to receive our heavenly bread in such a way that the Lord may reveal Himself to the eyes of our soul and make Himself thereby known since our bodily eyes cannot delight in beholding Him, because He is so hidden. Such knowledge is another kind of satisfying and delightful sustenance that maintains life. [In order to sustain life we will be desiring that other bread more often than we want and asking for it even without realizing we're doing so. There's no need to stir ourselves to ask for it; for our wretched tendency toward base things will awaken us, as I say, more often than we may desire. But let us watch so that we don't advertently place our care on anything other than begging the Lord for what I have mentioned; in having this, we will have everything.]
6. Do you think this heavenly food fails to provide sustenance, even for these bodies, that it is not a great medicine even for bodily ills? I know that it is. I know a person with serious illnesses, who often experiences great pain, who through this bread had them taken away as though by a gesture of the hand and was made completely well. This is a common experience, and the illnesses are very recognizable, for I don't think they could be feigned. And because the wonders this most sacred bread effects in those who worthily receive it are well known, I will not mention many that could be mentioned regarding this person I've spoken of. I was able to know of them, and I know that this is no lie. But the Lord had given her such living faith that when she heard some persons saying they would have liked to have lived at the time Christ our Good walked in the world, she used to laugh to herself. She wondered what more they wanted since in the most Blessed Sacrament they had Him just as truly present as He was then.
7. But I know that for many years, when she received Communion, this person, though she was not very perfect, strove to strengthen her faith so that in receiving her Lord it was as if, with her bodily eyes, she saw Him enter her house. Since she believed that this Lord truly entered her poor home, she freed herself from all exterior things when it was possible and entered to be Him. She strove to recollect the senses so that all of them would take notice of so great a good, I mean that they would not impede the soul from recognizing it. She considered she was at His feet and wept with the Magdalene, no more nor less than if she were seeing Him with her bodily eyes in the house of the Pharisee. And even though she didn't feel devotion, faith told her that He was indeed there.
8. If we don't want to be fools and blind the intellect there's no reason for doubt. Receiving Communion is not like picturing with the imagination, as when we reflect upon the Lord on the cross or in other episodes of the Passion, when we picture within ourselves how things happened to Him in the past. In Communion the event is happening now, and it is entirely true. There's no reason to go looking for Him in some other place farther away. Since we know that Jesus is with us as long as the natural heat doesn't consume the accidents of bread, we should approach Him. Now, then, if when He went about in the world the mere touch of His robes cured the sick, why doubt, if we have faith, that miracles will be worked while He is within us and that he will give what we ask of Him, since He is in our house? His Majesty is not accustomed to paying poorly for His lodging if the hospitality is good.
9. If it pains you not see Him with your bodily eyes, consider that seeing Him so is not fitting for us. To see Him in His glorified state is different from seeing Him as He was when he walked through this world. On account of our natural weakness there is no person capable of enduring such a glorious sight, nor would anyone in the world want to continue in it. In seeing this Eternal Truth one would see that all the things we pay attention to here below are lies and jokes. And in beholding such great Majesty, how would a little sinner like myself who has so much offended Him remain so close to Him? Beneath that bread He is easy to deal with. If a king were disguised it wouldn't matter to us at all if we conversed with him without so many gestures of awe and respect. It seems he would be obliged to put up with this lack since he is the one who disguised himself. Who would otherwise dare approach so unworthily, with so much lukewarmness, and with so many imperfections!
10. Oh, how we fail to know what we are asking for; and how His wisdom provided in a better way! He reveals Himself to those who He sees will benefit by His presence. Even though they fail to see Him with their bodily eyes, He has many methods of showing Himself to the soul, through great interior feelings and through other different ways. Be with Him willingly; don't lose so good an occasion for conversing with Him as is the hour after having received Communion. If obedience should command something, Sisters, strive to leave your soul with the Lord. If you immediately turn your thoughts to other things, if you pay no attention and take no account of the fact that He is within you, how will He be able to reveal Himself to you? This, then, is a good time for our Master to teach us, and for us to listen to Him, kiss His feet because He wanted to teach us, and beg Him not to leave.
11. If you have to pray to Him by looking at His picture, it would seem to me foolish. You would be leaving the Person Himself in order to look at a picture of Him. Wouldn't it be silly if a person we love very much and of whom we have a portrait came to see us and we stopped speaking with him so as to carry on a conversation with the portrait? Do you want to know when it is very good to have a picture of Christ and when it is a thing in which I find much delight? When He himself is absent, or when by means of a great dryness He wants to make us feel He is absent. It is then a wonderful comfort to see an image of One whom we have so much reason to love. Wherever I turn my eyes, I would want to see His image. With what better or more pleasing thing can our eyes be occupied than with One who loves so much and who has in Himself all goods. Unfortunate are those heretics who through their own fault have lost this consolation among others.
12. But after having received the Lord, since you have the Person Himself present, strive to close the eyes of the body and open those of the soul and look into your own heart. For I tell you, and tell you again, and would like to tell you many times that you should acquire the habit of doing this every time you receive Communion and strive to have such a conscience that you will be allowed to enjoy this blessing frequently. Though He comes disguised, the disguise as I have said, does not prevent Him from being recognized in many ways, in conformity with the desire we have to see Him. And you can desire to see Him so much that He will reveal Himself to you entirely.
13. On the other hand, if we pay no attention to Him but after receiving Him leave Him and go seeking after other base things, what is there for Him to do? Must He force us to see Him, since He wants to reveal Himself to us? No, for they didn't treat Him so well when He let Himself be seen openly by all and told them clearly who He was; very few were those who believed Him. So His Majesty is being merciful enough to all of us who love Him, by letting us know that it is He who is present in the most Blessed Sacrament. He doesn't want to show Himself openly, communicate His grandeurs, and give His treasures except to those who He knows desire Him greatly; these are His true friends. I tell you that whoever is not His true friend and does not draw near to receive Him as such, by doing what lies in her power, will never trouble Him with requests that He reveal Himself. Such a person will hardly have fulfilled what the Church requires when she will leave and quickly forget what took place. Thus, such a person hurries on as soon as she can to other business affairs, occupations, and worldly impediments so that the Lord of the house may not occupy it.

CHAPTER 35
 
With a prayerful exclamation to the Eternal Father concludes the subject that was begun.
 
1. Because this matter is so important I have greatly enlarged upon it, even though in discussing the prayer of recollection I spoke of the significance of entering within ourselves to be alone with God. When you do not receive Communion, daughters, but hear Mass, you can make a spiritual communion. Spiritual communion is highly beneficial; through it you can recollect yourselves in the same way after Mass, for the love of this Lord is thereby deeply impressed on the soul. If we prepare ourselves to receive Him, He never fails to give in many ways which we do not understand. It is like approaching a fire; even though the fire may be a large one, it will not be able to warm you well if you turn away and hide your hands, though you will still get more heat than you would if you were in a place without one. But it is something else if we desire to approach Him. If the soul is disposed (I mean, if it wants to get warm), and if it remains there for a while, it will stay warm for many hours.
2. Now then, Sisters, consider that if in the beginning you do not fare well (for it could be that the devil will make you feel afflicted and constrained in heart since he knows the great damage that will be caused him by this recollection), the devil will make you think you find more devotion in others things and less in this recollection after Communion. Do not abandon this practice; the Lord will see in it how much you love Him. Remember that there are few souls who accompany Him and follow Him in trials. Let us suffer something for Him; His Majesty will repay you for it. Remember also how many persons there are who not only refuse to remain with Him but rudely reject Him. Well, we have to suffer something that He may understand we desire to see Him. And since He suffers and will suffer everything in order to find even one soul that will receive Him and lovingly keep Him within, let your desire be to do this. If there isn't anyone who will do it, the Eternal Father will rightly refuse to let Him remain with us. But the Father is so fond of friends and so much the Lord of His servants that in seeing the will of His good Son he doesn't want to hinder this excellent work; in it the Son's love for Him is fully demonstrated [by the invention of this admirable means in which He shows how much He loves us and helps us suffer our trials.]
3. Well, holy Father in heaven, since You desire and accept this work, and it is clear that You will not deny us anything that is good for us, there has to be someone, as I said in the beginning, who will speak for Your Son since he never looks out for Himself. Let us be the ones, daughters, even though the thought is a bold one, we being who we are. But obeying and trusting in the Lord's command to us that we ask, let us beseech His Majesty in the name of Jesus that, since nothing remained for Him to do and He left sinners a gift as great as this one, He might in His compassion desire and be pleased to provide a remedy that His Son may not be this badly treated. Let us beseech Him that, since His Son provided a means so good that we may offer Him many times in sacrifice, this precious gift may avail; that there'll be no advance made in the very great evil and disrespect committed and shown in places where this most Blessed Sacrament is present among those Lutherans, where churches are destroyed, so many priests lost, and the sacraments taken away.
4. Well, what is this, my Lord and my God! Either bring the world to an end or provide a remedy for these very serious evils. There is no heart that can suffer them, not even among those of us who are wretched. I beseech You, Eternal Father, that You suffer them no longer. Stop this fire, Lord, for if You will You can. Behold that Your Son is still in the world. Through His reverence may all these ugly and abominable and filthy things cease. In His beauty and purity He doesn't deserve to be in a house where there are things of this sort. Do not answer for our sakes, Lord; we not deserve it. Do it for Your Son's sake. We don't dare beseech You that He be not present with us; what would become of us? For if something appeases You, it is having a loved one like this here below. Since some means must be had, my Lord, may Your Majesty provide it.
5. O my God, would that I might have begged You much and served You diligently so as to be able to ask for this great favor in payment for my services, since You don't leave anyone without pay! But I have not done so, Lord; rather, perhaps I am the one who has angered You so that my sins have caused these many evils to come about. Well, what is there for me to do, my Creator, but offer this most blessed bread to You, and even though You have given it to us, return it to You and beg You through the merits of Your son to grant me this favor since in so many ways He has merited that You do so? Now, Lord; now; make the sea calm! May this ship, which is the Church, not always have to journey in a tempest like this. Save us, Lord, for we are perishing.

CHAPTER 36
 
Discusses these words of the Our Father: Dimitte nobis debita nostra.
 
1. Since our good Master saw that with this heavenly bread everything is easy for us, save through our own fault, and that we can carry out very well what we have said about the Father's will being done in us, He now tells the Father to forgive us our debts since we ourselves forgive. Thus, He says, going on with the prayer He teaches us, "And forgive us, Lord, our debts as we forgive our debtors."
2. Let us observe, Sisters, that he doesn't say "as we will forgive." We can thereby understand that whoever asks for a gift as great as the one last mentioned and whoever has already surrendered his will to God's will should have already forgiven. So, He says, "as we forgive." Thus, whoever may have said sincerely to the Lord fiat voluntas tua should have done that will entirely; at least have had the resolve to.
You see here why the saints were pleased with the wrongs and persecutions they suffered; they then had something to offer the Lord when they prayed to Him. What will someone as poor as I do, who has had so little to pardon and so much to be pardoned for?
This is a matter, Sisters, that we should reflect upon very much: that something so serious and important, as that our Lord forgive us our faults, which deserve eternal fire, be done by means of something so lowly as our forgiving others. And I have so little opportunity to offer even this lowly thing, that the Lord has to pardon me for nothing. [What can be said against someone like myself, or what wrong can be done to her who has deserved to be always mistreated by the demons? If the world were to treat me very badly, such mistreatment would be just. In sum, my Lord, I have nothing as a result to give You by means of which I may ask You to forgive my debts. May Your Son pardon me; no one has done me an injustice, and so I have nothing to pardon for your sake, unless, Lord, You accept my desire. It seems to be that anything I might forgive I would forgive in order that You would forgive me, or to do Your will unconditionally. Yet I don't know what I would do actually if I were condemned without fault. Now I see myself so deserving of blame in Your presence that everyone falls short with respect to blaming me; although those who do not know what I am, as You know, think they are offending me.] Here Your mercy fits in well. May You be blessed for putting up with one so poor as I. What Your Son says in the name of all has to exclude me because of what I am and because I am so penniless.
3. But, my Lord, are there some persons in my company who have not understood this? If there are, I beg them in Your name to remember this and pay no attention to the little things they call wrongs. It seems that, like children, we are making houses out of straw with these ceremonious little rules of etiquette. Oh, God help me, Sisters, if we knew what honor is and what losing honor consists in! Now I am not speaking of ourselves, for it would be quite bad for us not to have understood this yet, but of myself at the time when I prized honor without understanding what it was. I was following the crowd [through what I heard.] Oh, by how many things was I offended! I am ashamed now. Yet, I wasn't at that time one of those who pay close attention to these little rules of etiquette. But neither was I careful about the main rule, because I didn't consider or pay any heed to the honor that is beneficial; that is, the honor that benefits the soul. And how well it was said by whoever said it that honor and profit don't go together; although I don't know if it was said with this purpose in mind. But it is right to the point because the soul's profit and what the world calls honor can never go together. It's a frightful thing; the world moves in the opposite direction. Blessed be the Lord who drew us out of it. [May it please His Majesty that such a concept of honor always be as far from this house as it is now. God deliver us from monasteries where they pay attention to these ceremonious little rules. He is never much honored in such monasteries. God help me, what great foolishness, that religious seek honor in such trifles; I am astonished! You don't know about this, Sisters, but I want to tell you about it so that you will guard yourselves against it.]
4. But consider, Sisters, that the devil hasn't forgotten us. He also invents his own honors in monasteries and establishes his own laws. There, people ascend and descend in rank just as in the world. Those with degrees must follow in order, according to their academic titles. Why? I don't know. The one who has managed to become professor of theology must not descend to professor of philosophy, for it is a point of honor that he must ascend and not descend. Even if obedience should command, he would consider the change an affront. And there will always be someone standing by to defend him and tell him that it's an insult; then the devil at once discloses reasons why even according to God's law this thinking seems right. Well, now, among ourselves: the one who has been prioress must remain ineligible for any lower office; a preoccupation about who the senior is -- for we never forget this -- and we even think at times we gain merit by such concern because the order commands it.
5. One doesn't know whether to laugh or to cry; the latter would be more fitting. The order doesn't command us to lack humility. It commands that there be a balanced arrangement of things, but I don't have to be so careful about this arrangement when it comes to matters of self-esteem that I am as concerned about these little ceremonious rules as about other practices that perhaps we observe imperfectly. All of our perfection doesn't consist in the observance of what has to do with our honor. Others will look after me if I forget about myself. The fact is that since we are inclined to ascend -- even though we will not ascend to heaven by such an inclination -- there must be no descending. O Lord, Lord! Are You our Model and Master? Yes, indeed! Well then, what did Your honor consist of, You who honored us? Didn't you indeed lose it in being humiliated unto death? No, Lord, but You won it for all.
6. Oh, for the love of God, Sisters, how we get lost on the road because we start out wrong from the beginning. Please God no soul will be lost because it keeps these miserable little rules of etiquette without understanding what honor consists in. And then we shall reach the point of thinking that we have done a great deal if we pardon one of these little things that was neither an offense, nor an injury, nor anything. Like someone who has accomplished something, we shall think that the Lord pardons us because we have pardoned others. Help us understand, my God, that we do not know ourselves and that we come to You with empty hands; and pardon us through Your mercy. [Indeed, You are always the wronged and the offended one.] Truly, Lord, since all things come to an end, but the punishment is without end, I don't see anything that would give us a reason to remind You to grant us so great a favor; unless You would grant it because of Your Son who asks it of You.
7. But yet, how the Lord must esteem this love we have for one another! Indeed, Jesus could have put other virtues first and said: forgive us, Lord, because we do a great deal of penance or because we pray much and fast or because we have left all for You and love You very much. He didn't say forgive us because we would give up our lives for You, or, as I say, because of other possible things. But He said only, "forgive us because we forgive." Perhaps He said the prayer and offered it on our behalf because He knows we are so fond of this miserable honor and that to be forgiving is a virtue difficult for us to attain by ourselves but most pleasing to His Father.
8. Well, consider carefully, Sisters, that He says, "as we forgive," as though it were something already being done, as I have mentioned. And pay very close attention, for when among the favors God grants in the prayer of perfect contemplation that I mentioned there doesn't arise in the soul a very resolute desire to pardon any injury however grave it may be and to pardon it in deed when the occasion arises, do not trust much in that soul's prayer. And I don't refer to these nothings that they call injuries. For the soul God brings to Himself in so sublime a contemplation is not touched by these wrongs nor does it care at all whether it is esteemed or not. I didn't say this well, "nor does it care at all," for it is much more afflicted by honor than by dishonor and by a lot of ease and rest than by trials. For when truly the Lord has given His kingdom here below, the soul no longer desires honor in this world. And so as to reign more sublimely it understands that the above-mentioned way is the true way; it has already seen through experience the great gain and progress that comes to it by suffering for God. Very seldom does God give such great gifts, save to persons who have willingly undergone many trials for Him. As I have said in another part of this book, the trials of contemplatives are great, and so the Lord looks for contemplatives among people who have been tested.
9. Now then, Sisters, realize that since these contemplative already know what everything is worth, they are not long delayed by a passing thing. If at first a great affront or trial causes pain, their reason comes to their rescue, before the pain is fully felt, with another consideration as if to raise the banner and almost annihilate the pain by means of joy. This joy comes from their seeing that the Lord has placed in their hands something by which they will gain more graces and perpetual favors from His Majesty than they would in ten years through trials they might wish to undertake on their own. This is very common from what I understand, for I have dealt with many contemplatives and am certain that this is what happens. Just as others prize gold and jewels, they prize trials and desire them; they know that these latter are what will make them rich.
10. Self-esteem is far removed from these persons. They like others to know about their sins and like to tell about them when they see themselves esteemed. The same is true in matters concerning their lineage. They already know that in the kingdom without end they will have nothing to gain from this. If they should happen to be pleased to be of good descent, it's when this would be necessary in order to serve God. When it isn't, it grieves them to be taken for more than what they are; and without any grief at all but gladly they disillusion others. So it is with those to whom God grants the grace of this humility and great love for Himself. In what amounts to His greater service, they are already so forgetful of self that they can't even believe that others feel some things and consider them an affront.
11. These effects I just mentioned are found in persons who are closer to perfection and whom the Lord very habitually favors by bringing to Himself through perfect contemplation. But of the first effect, which is the resolve to suffer wrongs and suffer them even though this may be painful, I say that it will soon be possessed by anyone who has from the Lord this favor of the prayer of union. If one doesn't experience these effects and come away from prayer fortified in them, one may believe that the favor was not from God but an illusion, or the devil's gift bestowed so that we might consider ourselves more honored.
12. It can happen that in the beginning when the Lord grants these favors the soul will not immediately experience this fortitude. But I say that in a short while if He continues to grant them, it will have fortitude in this virtue of forgiving others even though it may not have fortitude in other virtues. I cannot believe that a person who comes so close to Mercy itself, where he realizes what he is and the great deal God has pardoned him of, would fail to pardon his offender immediately, in complete ease, and with a readiness to remain on very good terms with him. Such a person is mindful of the gift and favor granted by God, by which he saw signs of great love; and he rejoices that an opportunity is offered whereby he can show the Lord some love.
13. I repeat that I know many persons whom the Lord has favored by raising to supernatural things, giving them this prayer or contemplation that was mentioned and, even though I see other faults and imperfections in them, I have never seen anyone with this one; nor do I believe that such a fault will be present if the favors are from God, as I have said. The one who receives greater favors should observe whether these effects are increasing within him. If he doesn't see any increase, he should be afraid and refuse to believe that these gifts are from God, as I have said. For God's favor always enriches the soul it reaches. This is certain. Although the favor and gift passes quickly, it is gradually recognized through the benefits the soul receives. Since Jesus knows this well, He says resolutely to His holy Father that "we pardon our debtors."
