CHAPTER 37
 
Speaks of the excellence of this prayer, the Our Father, and of how we shall in many ways find consolation in it.
 
1. We ought to give great praise to the Lord for the sublime perfection of this evangelical prayer. Each of us, daughters, can apply the prayer to her own needs since it was composed by such a good Master. I marvel to see that in so few words everything about contemplation and perfection is included; it seems we need to study no other book than this one. Up to now the Lord has taught us the whole way of prayer and of high contemplation, from the beginning stages to mental prayer, to the prayer of quiet, and to that of union; so much so that, if I knew how to explain the matter, a large book on prayer could be written based on this genuine foundation. From here on, the Lord begins to teach us about the effects of His favors, as you have seen.
2. I have wondered why His Majesty did not explain more about these sublime and obscure things that we might all know about them. It has seemed to me that since this prayer was intended for general use so that each one could petition according to his own intention, be consoled, and think that he has a good understanding of the prayer, the Lord left it in this obscure form. Contemplatives and persons already very much committed to God, who no longer desire earthly things, ask for the heavenly favors that can, through God's goodness, be given on earth. Those who still live on earth, and it is good that they live in conformity with their state in life, may ask also for bread. They must be sustained and must sustain their households. Such a petition is very just and holy, and so also is their petition for other things according to their needs.
3. But both should consider that two of the things mentioned pertain to all; giving Him our will and forgiving others. True, there is a more and a less in the degree to which this is done, as has been said. The perfect will give their will in the way perfect souls do and forgive with that perfection that was mentioned. We, Sisters, will do what we can; the Lord receives everything. It seems that on our behalf He makes a kind of pact with His Eternal Father, like one who says: "You do this, Lord, and My brothers will do that." Well, surely He doesn't fail to do His part. Oh, oh, how well He pays! And He pays without measure!
4. We can say this prayer only once in such a way that the Lord will enrich us since He sees that we do so sincerely and are determined to do what we say. He likes us to be truthful with Him. If we speak plainly and clearly so that we don't say one thing and than act differently, He always gives more than what we ask of Him.
Our good Master knows this well. He knows that those who ask with perfection will be filled with such favors from His Father that they will reach a high state. In fact, those who are already perfect or those who are approaching it are not afraid of anything, nor should they be, since they have trampled the world underfoot, as the saying goes. The Lord of the world is pleased with them, and they have the greatest hope of this in the effects of the favors He grants them. Absorbed in these delights they don't want to remember even that there is a world or that they have enemies.
5. O Eternal Wisdom! O good Teacher! What a wonderful thing it is, daughters, to have a wise and cautious teacher who foresees the dangers. This is the entire good that a spiritual soul can desire here below because it provides great security. One could not exaggerate the importance of this. Thus since the Lord sees that it is necessary to awaken and remind us that we have enemies, that it is very dangerous to be negligent with regard to these enemies, and that we need much more help from the Eternal Father because our fall will be from a higher place, and so that we do not go about mistaken and without self-knowledge, He makes the following petitions so necessary for all as long a we live in this exile: "And lead us not, Lord, into temptation; but deliver us from evil."

CHAPTER 38
 
Deals with the great need we have to beseech the Eternal Father to grant us what we ask for in the words, Et ne nos inducas in tentationem, sed libera nos a malo; and explains some temptations. The subject matter is important.
 
1. We have great things to think about and understand here, Sisters, because these things are what we are asking for. Now see, I am certain that those who reach perfection do not ask the Lord to free them from trials or temptations or persecutions or struggles. This is another very great and certain effect of the contemplation and the favors His Majesty gives, and of the Lord's Spirit rather than an illusion. On the contrary, as I have said a little while ago, these persons desire, ask for, and love trials. They are like soldiers who are happier when there are more wars because they then hope to earn more. If there is no war, they receive their wages but realize they won't get rich.
2. Believe, Sisters, that the soldiers of Christ, those who experience contemplation and engage in prayer, are eager to fight. They never fear public enemies very much; they already recognized them and know that these enemies have no power against the strength the Lord gives and that they themselves always come out the victors and with much gain. They never turn from these enemies. Those whom they fear -- and it is right they fear and always ask the Lord to be freed from them -- are the traitorous enemies, the devils who transfigure themselves into angels of light, who come disguised. Not until they have done much harm to the soul do they allow themselves to be recognized. They suck away our blood and destroy our virtues, and we go about in the midst of the same temptation but do not know it. With regard to these enemies, daughters, let us ask and often beg the Lord in the Our Father to free us and not let us walk into temptation, so that they will not draw us into error or hide the light and truth from us, that the poison will be discovered. Oh, how rightly does our good Master ask this for us and teach us to ask for it.
3. Consider, daughters, the many ways these enemies can cause harm. Don't think they do so only by making us suppose that the delights and consolations they can feign in us are from God. This seems to me the least harm -- in part -- they can cause; rather, it could be that by means of this they will make one advance more quickly. For, in being fed on that delight, such a person will spend more hours in prayer. Since he doesn't know that the delight is from the devil and since he sees he is unworthy of those consolations, he doesn't stop thanking God. He will feel greater obligation to serve Him and, thinking the favors come from the hand of the Lord, he will strive to dispose himself so that God will grant him more.
4. Strive always, Sisters, for humility and to see that you are unworthy of these favors; do not seek them. I hold that the devil loses many souls who strive for this humility. He thinks he is going to bring them to perdition, but the Lord draws good from the evil the devil aims at. His Majesty looks at our intention, which is to please and serve Him and remain with Him in prayer; and the Lord is faithful. It's good to be on one's guard lest there be a break in humility, or some vainglory emerge. If you beseech the Lord to free you from this, do not fear, daughters, that His Majesty will allow you to be favored very much by anyone other than Himself.
5. The way the devil can do a great deal of harm, without our realizing it, is to make us believe we have virtues when we do not. This is a pestilence. In regard to the delights and consolations, it seems merely that we are receiving and that we have the greater obligation to serve. In regard to our thinking we are virtuous, it seems we are serving and giving and that the Lord is obliged to pay. Thus little by little this latter notion does great harm. On the one hand it weakens humility, and on the other hand we grow careless about acquiring that virtue we think we have already acquired. Well, what is the remedy, Sisters? That which seems best to me is what our Master teaches us: prayer and supplication to the Eternal Father not to let us enter into temptation.
6. I also want to tell you something else. If it seems the Lord has already given us virtue, let us understand that actually it has been received and that He can take it away, as in fact often happens, but not without His wonderful providence. Haven't you ever seen this for yourselves, Sisters? I have. Sometimes I think I am very detached; and as a matter of fact when put to the test, I am. At another time I will find myself so attached, and perhaps to things that the day before I would have made fun of, that I almost don't know myself. At other times I think I have great courage and that I wouldn't turn from anything of service to God; and when put to the test, I do have this courage for some things. Another day will come in which I won't find the courage in me to kill even an ant for God if in doing so I'd meet with any opposition. In like manner it seems to me that I don't care at all about things or gossip said of me; and when I'm put to the test this is at times true -- indeed I am pleased about what they say. Then there come days in which one word alone distresses me, and I would want to leave the world because it seems everything is a bother to me. And I am not alone in this. I have noticed it in many persons better than I, and know that it so happens.
7. Now since this is true, who will be able to say of himself that he is virtuous or rich? For at the very moment when there is need of virtue one finds oneself poor. No, Sisters; but let us always think we are poor, and not go into debt when we do not have the means with which to repay. The treasure will have to come from elsewhere, and we do not know when the Lord will want to leave us in the prison of our misery without giving us anything. And if others in thinking that we are good, bestow favor and honor on us -- which is the borrowing I mentioned -- both they and we ourselves will have been fooled. True, if we serve with humility, the Lord in the end will succor us in our needs; but if this poverty of spirit is not genuinely present at every step, as they say, the Lord will abandon us. And this abandonment by the Lord is one of His greatest favors, for He does it so that we might be humble and understand in truth that we have nothing we haven't received.
8. Now, then, take note of some other advice: the devil makes us think we have a virtue, let's say of patience because we resolve and make very frequent acts of willingness to suffer much for God, and it seems to us as a matter of fact that we would suffer much; so we are very satisfied, for the devil helps us to believe this. I advise you not to pay any attention to these virtues; let us neither think we know them other than by name nor, until we see the proof, think the Lord has given them to us. For it will happen that with one displeasing word spoken to you, your patience will go tumbling to the ground. When you suffer often, praise God that He is beginning to teach you this virtue of patience and strive to endure, for the suffering is a sign that in this way He wants you to pay for the virtue. He gives it to you, and you do not possess it save as though on deposit, as has already been said.
9. The devil brings about another temptation. We think we are very poor in spirit and have the habit of saying that we don't desire anything or that we couldn't care less about anything. But hardly does the occasion arise to receive a gift -- even if it would be more than we need -- than our poverty of spirit is completely ruined. So often do we say we have this virtue that we end up believing we have it.
Great is the importance of always being careful to understand this temptation, both in the things I have mentioned as well as in many others. For when the Lord truly gives one of these solid virtues, it seems it carries all the others in its wake. This is something felt very clearly. But I again warn you that even though it seems you possess it, you should fear lest you be mistaken. The truly humble person always walks in doubt about his own virtues, and usually those he sees in his neighbors seem more certain and more valuable.

CHAPTER 39
 
Continues the same subject, gives advice about some different kinds of temptations, and sets down two remedies by which to free oneself from them.
 
1. Now be also on your guard, daughters, against some types of humility given by the devil in which great disquiet is felt about the gravity of our sins. This disturbance can afflict in many ways even to the point of making one give up receiving Communion and practicing private prayer. These things are given up because the devil makes one feel unworthy. And when such persons approach the Blessed Sacrament, the time they used to spend in receiving favors is now spent in wondering whether or not they are well prepared. The situation gets so bad that the soul thinks God has abandoned it because of what it is; it almost doubts His mercy. Everything it deals with seems dangerous, and what it uses, however good, seems fruitless. It feels such distrust of itself that it folds its arms and remains idle; what is good in others seems evil when the soul sees it within its own self.
2. Consider carefully, daughters, the matter I'm going to speak to you about, for sometimes it will be through humility and virtue that you hold yourselves to be so wretched, and at other times it will be a gross temptation. I know of this because I have gone through it. Humility does not disturb or disquiet or agitate, however great it may be; it comes with peace, delight, and calm. Even though a person upon seeing himself so wretched understands clearly that he merits to be in hell, suffers affliction, thinks everyone should in justice abhor him, and almost doesn't dare ask for mercy, his pain, if the humility is genuine, comes with a sweetness in itself and a satisfaction that he wouldn't want to be without. The pain of genuine humility doesn't agitate or afflict the soul; rather, this humility expands it and enables it to serve God more. The other type of pain disturbs everything, agitates everything, afflicts the entire soul, and is very painful. I think the devil's aim is to make us think we are humble and, in turn, if possible, make us lose confidence in God.
3. When you find yourselves in this condition, stop thinking about your misery, insofar as possible, and turn your thoughts to the mercy of God, to how He loves us and suffered for us. And if you are undergoing a temptation, you will not even be able to do this, for the devil will not let you quiet your mind or concentrate on anything unless so as to tire you all the more. It will be enough if you recognize that this is a temptation.
Likewise he tempts us in regard to excessive penances so that we might think we are more penitential than others and are doing something. If you hide them from your confessor or prioress, of if when told to stop you do not do so, you are clearly undergoing a temptation. Strive to obey, even if this may be more painful for you, since the greatest perfection lies in obedience.
4. The devil sets up another dangerous temptation: self-assurance in the thought that we will in no way return to our past faults and worldly pleasures: "for now I have understood the world and know that all things come to an end and that the things of God give me greater delight." If this self-assurance is present in beginners, it is very dangerous because with it a person doesn't take care against entering once more into the occasions of sin, and he falls flat; please God the relapse will not bring about something much worse. For since the devil sees that he is dealing with a soul that can do him harm and bring profit to others, he uses all his power so that it might not rise.
Thus, however many delights and pledges of love the Lord gives you, never proceed with such self-assurance that you stop fearing lest you fall again; and be on guard against the occasions of sin.
5. Strive, without hiding anything, to discuss these favors and consolations with someone who will enlighten you. And take care about this: however sublime the contemplation, let your prayer always begin and end with self-knowledge. And if the favor is from God, even though you may not want to follow the advice, you will still follow it most of the time because God's favor brings humility and always leaves greater light that we may understand the little that we are.
I don't want to enlarge on this any more, for you will find many books with such advice. I have said what I did because I have experienced it and found myself in trouble at times. All that we say, however much it is, cannot give us complete security.
6. Thus, Eternal Father, what can we do but have recourse to You and pray that these enemies of ours not lead us into temptation? Let public enemies come, for by Your favor we will be more easily freed. But these other treacheries; who will understand them, my God? We always need to pray to You for a remedy. Instruct us, Lord, so that we may understand ourselves and be secure. You already know that few take this path; but if they have to travel it with so many fears, many fewer will take it.
7. What a strange thing! It's as though the devil tempts only those who take the path of prayer. And everyone is more surprised by a mistake of one of those who are nearing perfection than by the public mistakes and sins of a hundred thousand others. With these latter mistakes there is no need to consider whether they are good or bad, for from a thousand-leagues distance one recognizes that they come from Satan.
As a matter of fact people are right in being surprised, for among those who recite the Our Father as was explained there are so very few deceived by the devil that as something new and unusual their mistake causes surprise. It is something very common among mortals that they pass over easily what they continually see, and wonder about what seldom or almost never happens. And the devil himself causes them to be surprised, for this surprise is to his advantage; he loses many souls through one who reaches perfection. [And I say that this is so surprising I do not marvel that others are surprised. Unless it is very much due to their own fault, souls who practice prayer walk so much more securely than those who take another road. They are like those in the stands watching the bull in comparison with one who is right in front of its horns. I have heard this comparison, and it seems to me true to the letter.
Do not fear, Sisters, to travel these paths, for in prayer there are many. Some souls profit by one path, and others by another, as I have said. Prayer is a safe road; you will be more quickly freed from temptation when close to the Lord than when far. Beseech Him and ask Him to deliver you from evil as you do so often each day in the Our Father.]
