CHAPTER 40
 
Tells how by striving always to walk in the love and the fear of God we will proceed safely among so many temptations.
 
1. Now then, Good Master, teach us how to live without any sudden assault in so dangerous a war. What we can have, daughters, and what His Majesty gave us are love and fear. Love will quicken our steps; fear will make us watch our steps to avoid falling along the way. On this way there are many stumbling blocks for all of us who are alive and continue our journey. With this fear we will be secure against being deceived.
2. You will ask me how you can tell if you have these two virtues which are so great; and you are right in doing so, for you cannot be very certain and definite about them. If we possess love, we are certainly in the state of grace. But reflect, Sisters, that there are some signs that even the blind, it seems, see. They are manifest signs, though you may not want to recognize them. They cry out loudly, for not many possess them perfectly; and hence these signs are more obvious. Love and fear of God: what more could you ask for! They are like two fortified castles from which one can wage war on the world and the devils.
3. Those who truly love God, love every good, desire every good, favor every good, praise every good. They always join, favor, and defend good people. They have no love for anything but truth and whatever is worthy of love. Do you think it is possible for a person who really loves God to love vanities? No, indeed, he cannot; nor can he love riches, or worldly things, or delights, or honors, or strife, or envy. All of this is so because he seeks only to please the Beloved. These persons go about dying so that their Beloved might love them, and thus they dedicate their lives to learning how they might please Him more. Hide itself? Oh, with regard to the love of God -- if it is genuine love -- this is impossible. If you don't think so, look at St. Paul or the Magdalene. Within three days the one began to realize that he was sick with love; that was St. Paul. The Magdalene knew from the first day; and how well she knew! Love has this characteristic: it can be greater or lesser in degree. Thus, the love makes itself known according to its intensity. When slight, it shows itself but slightly; when strong, it shows itself strongly. But where there is love of God, whether little or great, it is always recognized.
4. However, the things with which we are now dealing more specifically, the deceptions and illusions the devil brings on contemplatives, are not few. With contemplatives there is always much love, or they wouldn't be contemplatives; and so their love is clearly recognized and in many ways. It is a great fire; it cannot but shine brightly. And if this splendor is not present, they should walk with serious misgivings; they should believe that they indeed have many reasons for fear; they should strive to understand these; they should pray, walk with humility, and beseech the Lord not to lead them into temptation. For certainly if this sign isn't present, I fear we may walk into temptation. But if one proceeds with humility, strives to know the truth, is subject to a confessor, and communicates with him openly and truthfully, it will come about, as has been said, that the things by which the devil intends to cause death will cause life, however many the haunting illusions he wants to scare you with.
5. But if you feel this love of God I've mentioned and the fear I shall now speak of, rejoice and be at peace. In order to disturb your soul so that you will not enjoy these wonderful blessings the devil will set a thousand false fears before you and strive that others do so. Since he cannot win us over, he can at least try to make us lose something. He may strive to make souls lose when they might have gained a great deal by thinking that his favors are from God and are bestowed on creatures as wretched as themselves and that it is possible for God to grant favors -- for it seems sometimes we have forgotten about the Lord's ancient mercies.
6. Do you think it matters little to the devil to set up these fears? No, it matters a great deal, for he causes two kinds of harm. First, those who listen to him are struck with a terror of approaching prayer, for they think they will be deceived. Second, if it were not for these fears many more would come closer to God in seeing that He is so good, as I have said,  and that it is possible for Him now to communicate so much with sinners. They covet these favors. And they are right, for I know some persons who were encouraged by such favors and began prayer; and in a short while the favors became authentic, and the Lord granted them great ones.
7. So, Sisters, when you see among yourselves someone to whom the Lord gives favors, praise the Lord very much but don't think she is for this reason safe; rather help her with more prayer. No one can be safe while living and engulfed in the dangers of this tempestuous sea.
You will not fail to recognize this love where it is present, nor do I know how it can be concealed. If we love creatures here on earth, it's impossible, we are told, to hide this, and the more we do to hide it the more it is revealed (and it is something so lowly that it doesn't merit the name "love," for it is grounded on nothing). And could one conceal a love that is so strong and just that it always increases and sees no reason to stop since its foundation is made from the cement of being repaid by another love? This other love can no longer be doubted since it was shown so openly and with so many sufferings and trials, and with the shedding of blood even to the point of death in order that we might have no doubt about it. Oh, God help me, how different must the love of God be from the love of creatures for whoever has experienced the former!
8. May it please His Majesty to give us His love before He takes us out of this life, for it will be a great thing at the hour of death to see that we are going to be judged by the One whom we have loved above all things. We shall be able to proceed securely with the judgment concerning our debts. It will not be like going to a foreign country but like going to our own, because it is the country of one whom we love so much and who loves us. [In this love -- besides everything else -- there is greater security than with earthly loves; in loving God we are certain that He loves us.] Remember here, my daughters, the gain there is in this love, and the loss in not having it. Such a loss puts us in the hands of the enemy, in hands so cruel, hands so hostile toward everything good, and so fond of everything bad.
9. What will become of the poor soul that, after being freed from the sufferings and trials of death, falls immediately into these hands? What a terrible rest it receives! How mangled as it goes to hell! What a multitude of different kinds of serpents! What a terrifying place! What a wretched inn! If it is hard for a self-indulgent person (for such are the ones who will be more likely to go there) to spend one night in a bad inn, what do you think that sad soul will feel at being in this kind of inn forever, without end?
Let us not desire delights, daughters; we are well-off here; the bad inn lasts for only a night. Let us praise God; let us force ourselves to do penance in this life. How sweet will be the death of one who has done penance for all his sins, of one who won't have to go to purgatory! Even from here below you can begin to enjoy glory! You will find no fear within yourself but complete peace.
10. As long as we have not reached this state, Sisters, let us beseech God that if therefore we are to receive sufferings, they will be received here below. For, with the hope of being freed from them, we can bear them here willingly, and we will not lose His friendship and grace. Let us beseech Him to give us His grace in this life so that we will not walk unawares into temptation.

CHAPTER 41
 
Speaks of the fear of God and of how we must be on guard against venial sins.
 
1. How lengthy I have been! But not as lengthy as I wanted to be, for it is a delight to speak about the love of God. What will it be like to possess it? May the Lord give it to me because of who His Majesty is. [Let me not leave this life, O my Lord, until I no longer desire anything in it; neither let me know any love outside of You, Lord, nor let me succeed in using this term "love" for anyone else. Everything is false since the foundation is false, and so the edifice doesn't last. I don't know why we are surprised. I laugh to myself when I hear it said: "That person repaid me badly." "This other one doesn't love me." What does anyone have to repay you for, or why should anyone love you? This experience will show you what the world is, for your very love for it will afterward punish you. And this is what wears you down: you realize you have let your affection become involved like children in their games.]
Now let us deal with the fear of God. This trait is also something easily recognized by the person who has it as well as by those who approach him. But I want you to understand that in the beginning it is not so developed, unless in some persons to whom as I have said, the Lord grants great favors, for in a short time He makes them rich in virtue. Hence this fear isn't discernible in everyone -- at the outset, I mean. It goes on increasing in strength each day. But it is soon recognized because in the beginning one starts to turn away from sin and its occasions and from bad companions; and other signs as well are seen. But once the soul has reached contemplation -- which is what we are now dealing with most -- fear of God also, as with love, becomes very manifest; it doesn't disguise itself even exteriorly. Despite the fact that you may watch these persons very carefully, you will not see them become careless. For no matter how long we observe them, the Lord keeps them in such a way that even if a thing very much to their own interest come along, they will not advertently commit a venial sin; mortal sins they fear like fire. And illusions involving sin are the ones I would want us, Sisters, to be very much afraid of. Let us beseech God always that the temptation may not be so strong as to make us offend Him, that its strength might not outweigh the fortitude He gives us to conquer it. This fear is what is important; it is what I desire may never be taken from us, for it is what will help us.
2. Oh, what a great thing it is to have resisted offending the Lord so that His slaves and servants in hell may be bound; for in the end all must serve Him despite themselves. But those in hell do so by force, whereas we do so willingly. Therefore, if we please the Lord, those in hell will be kept bound; they will not do anything that may be harmful to us however much they might draw us into temptation and set secret snares for us.
3. Be careful and attentive -- this is very important -- until you see that you are strongly determined not to offend the Lord, that you would lose a thousand lives rather than commit a mortal sin, and that you are most careful not to commit venial sins -- that is, advertently; for otherwise, who can go without committing many? But there is an advertence that is very deliberate; another that comes so quickly that committing the venial sin and adverting to it happen almost together in such a way that we don't first realize what we are doing. But from any very deliberate sin, however small it be, may God deliver us. [I don't know how we could be so bold as to go against such a great Lord, even though it be in something very small.] What's more, there is nothing small if it goes against His immense Majesty and we see He is looking at us. It seems to me a sin is very deliberate when, for example, one says: "Lord, although this grieves You, I will do it; I'm already aware that You see it, and I know You do not want it, and I understand this; but I want to follow my whim and appetite more than Your will." It doesn't seem to me possible that something like this can be called little, however light the fault; but it's serious, very serious. [For the love of God, daughters, never become careless in this regard; now -- glory be to the Lord -- you are not.]
4. Consider, Sisters, for the love of God, if you want to gain this fear of the Lord, that it is very helpful to understand the seriousness of an offense against God and to reflect on this frequently in your thoughts; for it is worth our life and much more to have this virtue rooted in our souls. And until you have it, you must always proceed carefully and turn from every occasion and companion who does not help you come closer to God. We should take great care in everything we do to bend our will, and take care that our speech be edifying; we must flee those places where conversations are not of God.
It's very necessary that this fear be deeply impressed within the soul. Such fear is easy to obtain if there is true love together with a great inner determination, as I have said, not to commit an offense against God for any created thing, even though afterward the soul may sometimes fall because we are weak and have no reason to trust ourselves. When we are more determined we are less confident of ourselves, for our confidence must be placed in God. When we understand this that I said about ourselves, there will be no need to go about so tense and constrained; the Lord will protect us, and the habit acquired will now be a help against offending Him. The need instead will be to go about with a holy freedom, conversing with those who are good even though they may be somewhat worldly. For those who, before you possessed this authentic fear of God, were a poison and a means of killing the soul will afterward often be a help to your loving and praising God more because He has freed you from that which you recognize as a glaring danger. If previously you played a part in contributing to their weaknesses, now by your mere presence you contribute to their restraint; this happens without their having any idea of paying you honor.
5. I often praised the Lord, thinking it comes about that often a servant of God, without uttering a word, prevents things from being said against God. This must happen for the same reason that something similar happens here below: there is always some restraint so as not to offend an absent person in the presence of someone known to be his friend. So it is with a servant of God: his friendship with God wins him respect no matter how lowly his status, and others avoid afflicting him in a matter they so well realize would grieve him; that is, they avoid offending God in his presence. The fact is that I don't know the reason for this, but I do know that it's a common occurrence. So do not be tense, for if you begin to feel constrained, such a feeling will be very harmful to everything good, and at times you will end up being scrupulous and become incapable of doing anything for yourself or for others. And if you don't end up being scrupulous, this constraint will be good for you but it will not bring many souls to God, because they will see so much repression and tenseness. Our nature is such that this constraint is frightening and oppressive to others, and they flee from following the road that you are taking, even though they know clearly that it is the more virtuous path.
6. Another harm derives from this attitude; it is that of judging others. There are those who advance with greater holiness and in order to be of benefit to their neighbor speak with him freely and without this constraint; but since they do not journey by your path they at once seem to you to be imperfect. If they have a holy joy, it will seem to be dissipation, especially to those of us who have no learning or knowledge of what one can speak about without sinning. This constraint is a very dangerous thing; it means going about in continual temptation and it bears ill effects; it is detrimental to your neighbor. To think that if all do not proceed as you do, in this constrained way, they are not proceeding well is extremely wrong.
And there is another harm: in some things of which you must speak, and it is right that you speak, you don't dare do so for fear of going to extremes; rather, perhaps, you speak well of something that it would be very good for you to abhor.
7. So, Sisters, strive as much as you can, without offense to God, to be affable and understanding in such a way that everyone you talk to will love your conversation and desire your manner of living and acting, and not be frightened and intimidated by virtue. This is very important for religious; the holier they are the more sociable they are with their Sisters. And even though you may feel very distressed if all your Sisters' conversations do not go as you would like them to, never turn away from them if you want to help your Sisters and be loved. This is what we must strive for earnestly, to be affable, agreeable, and pleasing to persons with whom we deal, especially our Sisters.
8. Thus, my daughters, strive to think rightly about God, for He doesn't look at trifles as much as you think, and don't lose your courage or allow your soul to be constrained, for many blessings could be lost. Have the right intention, a resolute will, as I have said, not to offend God. Don't let your soul withdraw into a corner, for instead of obtaining sanctity you will obtain many imperfections that the devil in other ways will place before you; and, as I have said, you will not be of as much benefit to yourself or to others as you could have been.
9. Here you see how, with two virtues -- love and fear of God -- you can advance on this road calmly and quietly, but not carelessly since fear must always take the lead. As long as we live, we will never have complete security; that would be a great danger. And this is what our Teacher understood when at the end of this prayer He spoke these words to His Father as one who well understood they were necessary.

CHAPTER 42
 
Discusses these last words of the Our Father: Sed libera nos a malo. Amen. But deliver us from evil. Amen.
 
1. It seems to me Jesus was right to include Himself in this petition, for we already see how tired He was of this life when He said to His Apostles at the last supper; I have greatly desired to eat this supper with you. Here we see how weary He must have been of living. Nowadays people don't tire of living even if they go on to be a hundred, but always want to live longer. True, we don't suffer in life as much evil and as many trials as His Majesty suffered, nor such poverty. What was His whole life if not a continual death, in which He always saw beforehand that most cruel death they were going to inflict on Him? And this was the least of His sufferings; but how many offenses committed against His Father and what a multitude of souls that were lost! If one who possesses charity here on earth finds all this a great torment, what must have been the Lord's torment, with His boundless and immeasurable charity? And what a good reason He had to beseech the Father to free Him finally from so many evils and trials and bring Him to rest forever in the Father's kingdom, since He was its true inheritor!
2. Amen. By the "amen" I understand that since with this word all things come to an end, the Lord asks likewise that we be freed from all evil forever. [It is useless, Sisters, to think that while we live we can be free of many temptations and imperfections and even sins, for it is said that whoever thinks he is without sin deceives himself -- and this is true. Now, if we turn to bodily ailments and hardships, who is without very many and in many ways? Nor is it good that we ask to be without them.
Well, then, let us understand what we are asking for here since it seems impossible to say "from all evil," whether of the body or, as I have said, of imperfections and faults in the service of God. I am not speaking about the saints -- they can do everything in Christ, as St. Paul said -- but sinners like myself. I see myself closed in by weakness, lukewarmness, and a lack of mortification, and many other things. I see that it behooves me to ask the Lord for a remedy. You, daughters, ask according to what you think. I do not find this remedy while living, and so I ask the Lord to deliver me from all evil forever. What good do we find in this life, Sisters, since we lack so much good and are absent from Him?
Deliver me, Lord, from this shadow of death, deliver me from so many trials, deliver me from so many sufferings, deliver me from so many changes, from so many compliments that we are forced to receive while still living, from so many, many, many things that tire and weary me, that would tire anyone who can bear to live. This weariness must come to me because I have lived so badly, and from seeing that the way I live now is still not the way I should live since I owe so much.] Thus I beseech the Lord to deliver me from all evil forever since I do not make up for what I owe; it could be that perhaps each day I become more indebted. And what is unendurable, Lord, is not to know for certain that I love You or that my desires are acceptable before You. O my Lord and my God, deliver me now from all evil and be pleased to bring me to the palace where all blessings are. What do they still hope for here, those to whom You have given knowledge of what the world is, and those who have a living faith concerning what the Eternal Father has kept for them?
3. To ask for these blessings with great desire and complete determination is a clear sign for contemplatives that the favors they receive in prayer are from God. Thus those who have this sign should esteem their prayer highly. In the case of my asking for these things the same is not true; I mean that it shouldn't be interpreted as a sign of divine favors; but since I have lived so badly, I fear living still longer; and so many trials weary me. It is no surprise that those who have a share in the consolations of God desire to be there where they will enjoy them more than in mere sips, that they do not want to remain in a life where there are these many obstacles to the enjoyment of so much good, and that they desire to be where the Sun of justice does not set. Everything they afterward see here below will be completely dark to them, and I marvel at how they live. They could not live with any contentment if they have received and already begun to enjoy the Lord's kingdom here below. And such a person must not live for his own will but for the will of his King.
4. Oh, how different this life would have to be in order for one not to desire death! How our will deviates in its inclination from that which is the will of God. He wants us to love truth; we love the lie. He wants us to desire the eternal; we, here below, lean toward what comes to an end. He wants us to desire sublime and great things; we, here below, desire base and earthly things. He would want us to desire only what is secure; we, here below, love the dubious. Everything is a mockery, my daughters, except beseeching God to free us from these dangers forever and draw us at last away from every evil. Even though our desire may not be perfect, let us force ourselves to make the request. What does it cost us to ask for a great deal? We are asking it of One who is powerful. But in order to be right, let us leave the giving to His will since we have already given Him our own. His name be forever hallowed in heaven and on earth, and may His will be always done in me. Amen.
[Here you see, friends, what it means to pray vocally with perfection. It means that you be aware of and understand whom you are asking, who it is that is asking, and what you are asking for. When they tell you that it isn't good to practice any other kind of prayer than vocal prayer, do not be distressed. Read this very carefully, and what you do not understand about prayer, beseech the Lord to teach you. For no one can take vocal prayer from you or make you recite the Our Father hastily and without understanding it. If some person should take it from you or counsel you to give it up, do not believe him. Believe that he is a false prophet and consider that in these times of ours you don't have to believe everybody. Even though there is nothing to fear from those who can counsel you now, we don't know what will come in the future.
I have also thought of saying something to you about how to recite the Hail Mary. But I have been so lengthy that I have to let it go. It is enough for you to have understood how to recite the Our Father well in order to know how to recite all the vocal prayers you must recite.]
5. Now see, Sisters, how the Lord by giving me understanding of the great deal we ask for when reciting this evangelical prayer has removed the difficulty involved in my teaching you and myself the path that I began to explain to you. May He be blessed forever! Certainly, it never entered my mind that this prayer contained so many deep secrets; for now you have seen the entire spiritual way contained in it, from the beginning stages until God engulfs the soul and gives it to drink abundantly from the fount of living water, which He said was to be found at the end of the way. [And having come out of it -- I mean of this prayer -- I don't know how to go any further.]
It seems the Lord has desired to give us understanding, Sisters, of the great consolation contained in this prayer. It is highly beneficial to persons who don't know how to read. If they understand this prayer, they can draw a lot of doctrine from it and find consolation there. [And when books are taken away from us, this book cannot be taken away, for it comes from the mouth of Truth itself, who cannot err. And since, as I have said, we recite the Our Father so many times in a day, let us delight in it and strive to learn from so excellent a Master the humility with which He prays and all the other things that were mentioned.]
6. Sisters, beg this good Master to pardon me, for I have been bold to speak of such sublime things. His Majesty knows well that my intellect would not have been capable of it if He had not taught me what I have said. Be grateful to Him, Sisters, for He must have done so because of the humility with which you asked and desired to be taught by someone so miserable.
[Well, Sisters, it now seems the Lord doesn't want me to say any more, for I don't know what to say; although I thought of going on. The Lord has taught you and me the path that I have described in the book I said I wrote, how one reaches this fount of living water, what the soul feels there, how God satisfies it, takes away thirst for earthly things, and makes it grow in the things pertaining to the service of God. Those who have reached this fount will find that book very beneficial and receive much light from it. You may get it from Father Domingo Báñez, a presentado of the Order of St. Dominic, who as I said is my confessor and the one to whom I'll give this book. If this one is all right for you to see and he gives it to you, he'll also give you that other one.]
7. If he thinks this book will be helpful and gives it to you, I will be consoled that you are consoled. If it should be such that no one may see it, you can accept my good will, for by this work I have obeyed your command. I consider myself well paid for the trouble involved in writing it, for there has been no trouble at all in thinking out what I have said.
May the Lord be blessed and praised; from Him comes every good we speak of, think about, and do. Amen.
