CHAPTER 1
 
Treats of the veneration with which the Sacred Scriptures should be read and of the difficulty women have in comprehending them, especially the Song of Songs.
 
Let the Lord kiss me with the kiss of His mouth, for Your breasts are better than wine, etc. ... (Sg. 1:2).
 
I have carefully noted that it seems from what is manifested here that the soul is speaking with one person and asking peace from another. It says: Let Him kiss me with the kiss of His mouth; and next, seemingly, it speaks to someone whom it is with: Your breasts are better.
I don't understand why this is; and that I don't understand gives me great delight. Indeed, daughters, the soul will not have to reflect upon the things it seems we can grasp with our lowly intellects here below as intensely as it will upon those that can in no way be understood; nor will the former make it respect God as much as do His mysteries. Thus I highly recommend that when you read some book or hear a sermon or think about the mysteries of our sacred faith you avoid tiring yourselves or wasting your thoughts in subtle reasoning about what you cannot properly understand. Many things are not meant for women to understand, nor even for men.
2. When the Lord desires to give understanding, His Majesty does so without our effect. I am saying this to women, and also to men who aren't obliged to defend the truth through their learning. For those whom the Lord has called to explain the Scriptures to us must understandably work, and they will gain much from their work. But we should accept with simplicity whatever the Lord gives us; and what He doesn't we shouldn't tire ourselves over, but rejoice in considering what a great Lord and God we have. For one word of His will contain within itself a thousand mysteries, and thus our understanding is only very elementary. That we do not understand His words when they are written in Latin or Hebrew or Greek is no surprise. But even in our own language; how many things there are in the psalms of the glorious King David that after being translated into the vernacular for us remain as obscure as they were in Latin! Thus always guard against wasting your thoughts on these things or tiring yourselves, for women have need of no more than what is sufficient for their meditations. With this, God will favor them. When His Majesty desires to give us understanding of the words, without worry or work on our part, we shall surely find it. As for the rest, let us humble ourselves and, as I have said, rejoice that we have such a Lord, that even words of His spoken in our own language cannot be understood.
3. It will seem to you that there are some words in the Song of Songs that could have been said in another style. In light of our dullness such an opinion doesn't surprise me. I have heard some persons say that they avoid listening to them. Oh, God help me, how great is our misery! Just as poisonous creatures turn everything they eat into poison, so do we. From favors as great as those the Lord gives us here in revealing what is possessed by the soul who loves Him and in encouraging it to speak with His Majesty and find delight in Him, we have to create fears and give opinions that manifest the small degree of love of God we have.
4. O my Lord, how poorly we profit from the blessing You grant us! You seek ways and means and you devise plans to show Your love for us; we, inexperienced in loving You, esteem this love so poorly that our minds, little exercised in love, go where they always go and cease to think of the great mysteries this language, spoken by the Holy Spirit, contains within itself. What more was necessary than this language in order to enkindle us in His love and make us realize that not without good reason did He choose this style.
5. Indeed, I recall hearing a priest who was a religious preach a very admirable sermon, most of which was an explanation of those loving delights with which the bride communed with God. And there was so much laughter, and what he said was so poorly taken, that I was shocked. He was speaking about love since the sermon was on Maundy Thursday, when one shouldn't be speaking of anything else. And I see clearly that the reason for not understanding is the one I mentioned (that we practice so poorly the love of God), for it doesn't seem to us possible for a soul to commune in such a way with God. These people did not benefit, surely because they did not understand, nor, I believe, did they think anything but that the preacher made the sermon up in his own head. Yet, I know other persons who have drawn out great good, delight, and security against fears, so much so that they had to offer special praise to our Lord. He has left a salutary remedy to souls that love Him with a fervent love because they understand and see that it is possible for God to humble Himself so much. For experience was not enough to keep them from fearing when the Lord granted them great favors. What they see represented here makes them feel secure.
6. I know someone who for a number of years had many fears, and nothing gave her assurance, but the Lord was pleased that she hear some words from the Song of Songs, and through them she understood that her soul was being well guided. As I have said, she understood that it was possible for a soul in love with its Spouse to experience all these favors, swoons, deaths, afflictions, delights, and joys in relation to Him. It does so after it has left all the world's joys out of love for Him and is completely given over and abandoned into His hands, and when it has done this not just in words, as happens with some, but in all truth, confirmed with works.
Oh, my daughters, how well God repays! You have a Lord and Spouse with whom nothing takes place without His seeing and understanding it! Thus, even though the things be very small, do not fail to do what you can for love of Him. His Majesty will repay for them; He looks only at the love with which you do them.
7. Hence, I conclude this matter by saying that you should never dwell on what you do not understand in Sacred Scripture or the mysteries of our faith more than I have said, nor should you be startled by the lofty words that take place between God and the soul. Being what we are, the love that He had and has for us surprises and bewilders me more; for knowing that He has such love, I already understand that there is no exaggeration in the words by which He reveals it to us, for He has shown this love even more through his deeds. But when you reach this place in my writing, I ask you that for love of me you pause a little to think upon what He has shown us and what He has suffered for us, observing clearly that a love so powerful and strong that it made Him suffer so much could not reveal itself in words that should be any surprise to us.
8. Well now, to return to what I began saying, these words must contain great things and mysteries since they are of such value that when I asked learned men to explain what the Holy Spirit meant by them and what the true meaning was they answered that the doctors wrote many commentaries and yet never finished explaining the words fully. Since this is so, it will seem to be excessive pride on my part to want to explain something about them for you. It is not my intention, however little my humility, to think that I can get to the truth of them. What I do intend is that, just as I delight in what the Lord gives me understanding of when I hear some passage from the Song of Songs, you will perhaps find consolation in it, as I do, if I tell you. And I interpret the passage in my own way, even though my understanding of it may not be in accord with what is meant. For if we do not depart from what the Church and the saints hold (which is why learned men who understand the matter will examine this carefully before you see it), the Lord gives us license -- from what I think -- just as He does when we think of the Passion and consider many more things about the anguish and torments the Lord must have suffered than the Evangelists record. And if we do not indulge in curiosity, as I said at the beginning, but accept the understanding His Majesty gives us, I hold it as certain that we do not offend Him when we find delight and consolation in His words and works. A king would be happy and pleased if he saw a little shepherd he loved looking spellbound at the royal brocade and wondering what it is and how it was made. Nor must we make women stand so far away from enjoyment of the Lord's riches. If they argue and teach and think they are right without showing their writings to learned men; yes, that would be wrong. Consequently, I am not thinking I am right in what I say -- the Lord knows this well. But as with this little shepherd I mentioned, it consoles me to tell my meditations to my daughters; and what I tell will contain plenty of foolishness. Thus I begin with the favor of my divine King and with the permission of my confessor. May it please His Majesty that as He has wanted me to succeed in explaining other things for you -- and perhaps He did so because they were for you -- I might succeed in explaining these. If I don't I will consider the time well spent that I occupy in writing and reflecting upon material so divine that I haven't deserved to hear it.
9. It seems to me from what she says in the beginning that she is speaking with a third person; and she herself makes it known that there are in Christ two natures, one divine and the other human. I'm not going to dwell on this, because my intention is to speak about what I think can be beneficial to us who engage in prayer; although everything is beneficial for the encouragement and admiration of a soul that ardently loves the Lord. His Majesty knows well that even though at times -- and these were few -- I have heard explanations of some of these words and have been told their meaning when I asked, I don't remember the explanations at all, for I have a very poor memory. Thus, I shall be able to say only what the Lord teaches me and what serves my purpose; and I don't remember ever having heard anything about this first verse.
Let Him kiss me with the kiss of His mouth.
10. O my Lord and my God, and what words are these that a worm speaks them to its Creator! May You be blessed, Lord, for in so many ways have You taught us! But who will dare, my King, utter these words without Your permission? The thought is frightening, and so it will be frightening that I tell anyone to utter them. People will say I am a fool, that the words don't mean this, that they have many meanings, that obviously we must not speak such words to God, that for this reason it is good that simple people do not read these things. I confess that the passage has many meanings. But the soul that is enkindled with a love that makes it mad desires nothing else than to say these words. Indeed, the Lord does not forbid her to say them.
God help me! Why are we surprised? Isn't the deed more admirable? Do we not approach the most Blessed Sacrament? And I was even wondering if the bride was asking for this favor that Christ afterward gave us. I also wondered whether she was asking for that union so great that God became man, for that friendship that he effected with the human race. Obviously a kiss is the sign of great peace and friendship among two persons. May the Lord help us understand how many kinds of peace there are.
11. Before I go any further, and so as not to forget, I want to say one thing -- very important in my opinion -- although the matter would fit better at another time. I hold as certain that there are many persons who approach the most Blessed Sacrament (and please the Lord I be lying) with serious mortal sins. Yet, if such persons were to hear a soul dying with love of its God say these words, they would be surprised and consider it great boldness. At least I am sure they themselves would not say them, for these words and others similar ones in the Song of Songs are said by love. Since such persons have no love, they can easily read the Song of Songs every day and not themselves become involved with the words; nor would they even dare take the words on their lips. For truly even hearing them makes one fear, for these words bear in themselves great majesty. How much majesty You bear, my Lord, in the most Blessed Sacrament. But since these persons do not have a living faith but a dead one, You do not speak to them when they see You so humble under the species of bread. They do not deserve to hear -- and thus they are not so daring.
12. As a result these words in themselves, taking them only literally, would truly cause fear if the one uttering them were in his senses. But the one whom Your love, Lord, has drawn out of himself, You will truly pardon if he says them and also others, even though to say them is daring. And my Lord, if the kiss signifies peace and friendship why shouldn't souls ask You for this kiss? What better thing can we ask than what I ask You for, my Lord; that You give me this peace with the kiss of Your mouth? This daughters, is a lofty petition, as I shall tell you afterward.
