CHAPTER 2
 
Treats of nine kinds of false peace presented to the soul by the world, the flesh, and the devil. Explains the holiness of the religious state. This holiness leads to the true peace desired by the bride in the Song of Songs.
 
1. God deliver you from the peace of many kinds that worldly people have. May He never allow us to try it, for it brings perpetual war. When such persons of the world remain quiet, while going about in serious sin, and so tranquil about their vices, for their consciences don't feel remorseful about anything, their peace, you have read, is a sign that they and the devil are friends. While they live, the devil does not wage war against them. For bad as they are they would then return to God somewhat, not out of love for Him but so as to flee from this war. Those who would act in such a way would never persevere in serving God. Soon, since the devil understands this, he would again give them delight in their pleasure and they would return to their friendship with him, until he has them in that place where he shows them how false their peace was. There is no reason to speak of these persons here; let them worry about it, for I hope in the Lord that so much evil will not be found among you. But the devil could begin to offer you another peace in small things, and always, while we live, daughters, we must fear.
2. When a Sister begins to grow lax in things that in themselves seem small, persisting in them for a long time without feeling any remorse of conscience, the resulting peace is bad. And consequently the devil can draw her into a thousand evils. Examples of these little things would be an infraction of something in the constitutions, which in itself would not be a sin, or being careless, even though without malice, about what the bishop commands (in fact he stands in God's place, and it is good always -- for this reason we have come here -- to consider what he desires), and many other little things that come along and which in themselves do not appear to be sins. In sum, there are faults and always will be, for we are miserable creatures. I don't say that there are not; what I say is that these faults should be felt when they are committed and that the soul should understand that there was a fault. For if the soul doesn't, the devil, as I say, can rejoice and gradually make it insensible to these little things. I tell you, daughters, that when the devil attains this, he has attained no small thing, for I fear he will go further. Hence, for love of God be very careful. There must be war in this life. In the face of so many enemies it's not possible for us to sit with our hands folded; there must always be this care about how we are proceeding interiorly and exteriorly.
3. I tell you that even though in prayer the Lord grants you favors and gives you what I shall speak of later, when you leave prayer you will meet with a thousand little obstacles, a thousand little occasions to break one rule carelessly, or not to carry out another well, interior disturbances and temptations. I don't say that this war must be going on always or habitually; but it is a wonderful favor from the Lord. By this means the soul advances. It's impossible for us to be angels here below because such is not our nature. In fact, a soul doesn't disturb me when I see it with great temptations. If love and fear of our Lord are present, the soul will gain very much; I'm certain of that. If I see a soul always quiet and without any war -- for I've run into some like this -- I always fear even if I do not see it offending the Lord. Never do I finish seeking to assure myself; and trying and tempting such persons, if I can, since the devil doesn't do so, in order that they may know themselves. I have met a few; to be without war is possible, once the Lord has brought the soul to an abundance of contemplation.
4. There is a variety of ways to proceed in prayer. These souls I am referring to remain in an habitual and interior happiness. Yet, I think they do not understand themselves. And after I take a careful look I see that sometimes they have their little wars, though these are few. But it is a fact that I do not envy these souls. I have considered the matter attentively and see that those who have to fight the war that was mentioned advance much further in the things pertaining to perfection, without experiencing such abundant prayer, than we can understand here below. Let us exclude souls that are far advanced and very mortified after having endured this war for many years. Since they are already dead to the world, our Lord ordinarily gives them peace, but not in such a way that they don't deplore a fault they may commit and experience deep sorrow over it.
5. Thus, daughters, the Lord leads souls along many paths. But always fear, as I have said, when some fault you commit does not grieve you. For in regard to sin, even venial, you already know that the soul must feel deep sorrow, and, glory to God, I believe and see that you do feel it now.
Note one thing, and remember this for love of me: if a person is alive, doesn't he feel a tiny pinprick or a thorn however small? Well then, if our souls are not dead but alive in the love of God, isn't it a great favor to feel any little thing we do against our obligations or what we have professed? Oh, His Majesty is making a bed of roses and flowers for Himself in the soul to whom He gives this care, and it is impossible that He fail to come and favor it, even though late. God help me, what are we religious doing in the monastery? Why did we leave the world? For what reason did we come? In what better way could we be occupied than to prepare rooms within our souls for our Spouse and reach the stage in which we can ask Him to give us the kiss of His mouth? Happy will be the soul that makes this request and whose lamp will not be out when the Lord comes, otherwise the Lord will grow tired of knocking, and turn away. Oh, my daughters! What a great state of life we are in, for no one but we ourselves can keep us from saying these words to our Spouse since we took Him for our Spouse when we made our professions.
6. Let scrupulous souls understand me, for I am not speaking of some fault that is committed occasionally or of faults that cannot be recognized or always felt by everyone, but of one who commits faults habitually without paying any attention to them, thinking they are trifles, and without any remorse, and who does not strive to make amends. I repeat that peace of this sort is dangerous and you should be warned about it. Well now, what will be the peace of those who are very lax about the observance of their rule? (Please God there will be none). In many ways the devil will give them peace, for God permits him to do so on account of our sins. There is no reason to discuss the matter. I wanted to warn you with this small comment. Let us go on to the peace and friendship the Lord begins to show us in prayer, and I will tell what His Majesty makes known to me.
7. But before I do, I think it will be good to tell you a little about the peace the world and our own sensuality give. Even though in many books this topic has been discussed better than I'm capable of doing, perhaps you will not have money to buy books, for you are poor, or have any benefactor to give them to you. Whereas this writing of mine will remain in the house, and you will have all the material together. Souls could in many ways be deceived by the peace the world gives. From some of these ways that I shall mention you will deduce the rest.
8. Oh, as for riches! If people have easily what they need and a lot of money in their coffers and guard against committing serious sins, they think everything is done. They enjoy what they have. They give an alms from time to time. They do not reflect that their riches are not their own but given by the Lord so that they, as His stewards, may share their wealth among the poor, and that they must give a strict account for the time they keep a surplus in their coffers while delaying and putting off the poor who are suffering. This topic is not pertinent to us except that you beg the Lord to give rich people light that they may not continue in this daze and have happen to them what happened to the covetous rich man, and that you praise His Majesty because He has made you poor, and that you accept poverty as a particular favor from Him.
9. Oh, my daughters, what a great relief it is, even with respect to our tranquility here below, not to have these burdens; as for the final day, you can't imagine. The rich are the slaves and you are the masters. By the following example you will see this clearly. Who is more at rest? A gentleman who has all he needs to eat on the table and all his clothing laid out for him or his steward who must render him an account of every penny? The gentleman spends without measure since all belongs to him. The poor steward is the one who suffers for it. And the more wealth there is the more vigilant the steward has to be, for he has to give an accounting. He will especially have a large balance to make up if he has held the office for many years and has been a little careless. I don't know how he stays calm. Don't read this, daughters, without praising our Lord very much, and always go forward doing what you are now doing in not having any possessions in particular. For without worry we eat what the Lord sends since His Majesty takes care that we lack nothing. We don't have to give an account of what is left over because His Majesty provides in such a way that what is left is so small that we are not obliged to share it with others.
10. What is necessary, daughters, is that we be content with little. We must not want as much as those who give a strict accounting, as any rich person will have to give, even though he may not have to do so here on earth but receives it from his stewards. And how strict an accounting he will have to give! If he understood he would not eat so happily nor would he spend what he has on vanities and trivialities. As for you, daughters, look always for the poorest things, which will be enough to get by on; in clothing as well as in food. If you don't you will find yourselves frustrated because God is not going to give you more, and you will be unhappy. Strive always to serve His Majesty in such a way that you do not eat the food of the poor without serving Him for it; although one can only poorly repay in service for the calm and repose the Lord gives when there is no obligation to account for riches. I well know that you understand, but it's necessary that at times you give special thanks to His Majesty for riches.
11. Concerning the peace the world gives through honors, I don't think I have to say anything for you; the poor are never honored very much. What can do you great harm is praise -- for once it starts it never ends -- if you are not careful, so as to humble yourselves more afterward. The most common way will be by telling you that you are saints, in such exaggerated terms that it seems the devil teaches these words. And indeed he must sometimes. For if the words were spoken in the person's absence, they could be tolerated. But spoken in the person's presence, what fruit can they bear? Only harm, if you are not very cautious.
12. For love of God I ask you that you never seek peace for yourselves through these words of praise, for little by little they could do you harm and make you believe that the truth was spoken or make you think that now everything is accomplished and that you have done your part. You should never let a word of praise pass without it moving you to wage war interiorly, for this is easily done if you acquire the habit. Remember how the world treated Christ, our Lord, and how they exalted Him on Palm Sunday. Look at the esteem it had for St. John the Baptizer, for they wanted to take them for the Messiah, and how and why they beheaded him.
13. Never does the world exalt without putting down, if the exalted are the sons of God. I have a lot of experience of this. It used to afflict me to see so much blindness in these praises, and now I laugh to myself as though someone crazy were speaking. Remember your sins, and if in some matters people speak the truth in praising you, note that the virtue is not yours and that you are obliged to serve more. Awaken fear in your soul so that you do not rest in the kiss of this false peace given by the world; think that it is a kiss from Judas. Although some do not praise you with such an intention, the devil is watching to see how he can take away the spoils if you do not defend yourselves against him. Believe that you have to stand here with a sword in the hand of your thoughts. Although you think the praise does you no harm, do not trust it. Remember how many were at the top and are now at the bottom. There is no security while we are alive. For love of God, Sisters, always wage an interior war against these praises, for thus you will come away from them with the gain of humility, and the devil and the world who are on the lookout for you will be abashed.
14. Concerning the peace and harm that this security can cause in your own flesh, there would be much to say. I shall mention some points, and from them, as I have said, you can go on to deduce the rest. The flesh is very fond of comfort -- you have already seen this. If we could understand we would realize that to seek one's peace in comforts is very dangerous. I often think about the matter and cannot understand how there can be so much peace and calm in persons who live very comfortably. Does the most sacred body of your Model and Light perhaps deserve less comfort than our own bodies? What did the Lord do to suffer so many trials? Have we read the lives of the saints, those who we know for sure are in heaven, that they had a comfortable life? Where does this tranquility in comfort come from? Who has told us that comfortable living is good? What is this, that some persons spend their days eating well and sleeping and seeking recreations and all the rest they can? I'm stunned when I consider this. It doesn't seem to them there will be another world and they think that the things mentioned are the least dangerous of this present world.
15. Oh, daughters, if you knew what great evil lies enclosed here. The body grows fat and the soul weakens. If we were to see the soul, we would think it about ready to expire. In many books you will find doctrine written about the great evil found in seeking one's peace in comforts, for if we understand that to do so is wrong, we will have hope for a remedy. But I fear that the thought doesn't pass through people's minds. I'm not surprised since the evil is so common. I tell you that even though through comforts a persons' flesh is at rest, in a thousand ways there will be war if such a person is going to be saved. And it would be more valuable for souls to understand themselves and take up gradually the penance that otherwise will come to them all at once. I have said this that you might fervently praise God, daughters, that you are in a place where your flesh cannot find peace in comforts even though it may want to. Such craving for comfort could harm you without your being aware, that is, under the excuse of sickness. You need to be very careful about this. For one day it will hurt you to take the discipline and eight days later perhaps not. Another day or number of days you will be unable to bear the coarse tunics, but this won't be permanent. Some days eating fish may hurt you, but once your stomach gets used to it, it will not harm you. Another time you will think you are so weak that you'll be unable to go without eating meat, but by not fasting for one day you will overcome this weakness. Of these things and of much more, I have experience. It shouldn't be thought that these things involve serious fault, but that there may not be much need for them. What I am saying is that we must not find our rest in being lax, but must test ourselves sometimes. I know that this flesh is very deceptive and that we need to understand it. May the Lord out of His goodness give us light for everything. Discretion is very important, as is also trust in our superiors rather than in ourselves.
16. To return to our topic; since the bride indicates the peace she is seeking by saying, Let Him kiss me with the kiss of His mouth, we have a sign that the Lord has other ways of bestowing peace and showing friendship. I now want to explain some to you so that you will see the kind of lofty petition this is and the difference that lies between these two types of peace.
O great God and Lord of ours, what profound wisdom! Well could the bride have said, let Him kiss me, and, it seems, have concluded her petition in fewer words. Why does she specify, with the kiss of His mouth? Surely, there is not a letter too many. I don't know the reason, but I shall say something about this. It matters little if what I say is not what the passage means provided, as I said, we benefit from the thoughts. Now then, in many ways does our King offer souls peace and friendship, as we see each day both in prayer and outside of it; but our friendship with His Majesty is only skin-deep, as the saying goes. You will observe, daughters, the degree of love you have reached in that you will be able to ask for that which the bride does if the Lord brings you to Himself. If He doesn't do so, do not become discouraged; whatever the friendship you have with God, you will be very rich if there is no fault on your part. But we should grieve and be very sorry that through our own fault we do not reach this excellent friendship and that we are happy with little.
17. O Lord, why is it that we do not remember that the reward is great and everlasting, and that once we have reached such close friendship here below the Lord gives us the reward, and that many remain at the foot of the mount who could ascend to the top? In other little things I have written for you I have often mentioned this, and now I repeat and ask that you always have courageous thoughts. As a result of them the Lord will give you grace for courageous deeds. Believe that these brave thoughts are important. There are some persons who have already attained friendship with the Lord because they have confessed their sins well and have repented, but two days don't pass before they return to them. Indeed, that is not the friendship the bride is asking for. Always strive, O daughters, so that you don't go to the confessor each time to confess the same fault.
18. It's true that we cannot live without faults, but at least there should be some change so that they don't take root. If they take root, they will be harder to eradicate and even many others could arise from them. If we plant an herb or small tree and water it each day, it grows so strong that afterward you need a shovel and a pickax to get it out by the roots. Committing the same fault each day, however small, if we do not make amends for it, is like watering a plant each day. And if one day it is planted and ten more pass by, it can still be easily rooted out. In prayer you must ask help from the Lord, for we of ourselves can do little; rather, we add faults instead of taking them away. Reflect that in that frightful judgment at the hour of death we shall see that this was no small matter especially for those the Judge took for His brides in this life.
19. Oh, great dignity, worthy of awakening us that we might try diligently to please this Lord and King of ours! But how badly these persons repay this friendship since they turn so quickly into mortal enemies! Indeed, how great is the mercy of God. Where would we find a friend so patient? And even if a friend commits one fault, it is never erased from the other's memory, nor do the two manage to have a friendship as trusting as before. Now then, how often will souls similarly fail in their friendship with our Lord, and how many years He waits for us in this way? May You be blessed, Lord, my God, for You show us so much pity that it seems You forget Your greatness so as not to punish -- as would be right -- a betrayal as treacherous as this. I think this infidelity is a dangerous state, for even though the mercy of God is what it is we also frequently see people dying in this state without confession. May His Majesty deliver us, because of who He is, daughters, from being in so dangerous a state.
20. There is another kind of friendship, stronger than this, had by persons who guard themselves against offending the Lord mortally. Those who have reached this stage have attained much, the world being what it is. These persons even though they guard themselves against sinning mortally do not fail to fall now and again, from what I believe. For they care little about venial sins; they commit many daily, and thus they are very close to committing mortal sins. They will ask: "Do you pay attention to that?" Many others I have heard say: "That's why we have holy water and the remedies of our holy Mother the Church." Such remarks are certainly something to grieve over very much. For love of God, take great care never to grow careless about venial sin, however small, by recalling that we have a remedy. It is not right that something good be the occasion for doing wrong. To be mindful of this remedy after the fact and to strive to use it at once is, of course, good.
21. It is a very important thing always to have a conscience so pure that nothing hinders you from asking our Lord for the perfect friendship the bride asks for. At least, the kind of friendship we just mentioned is not the one the bride asks for. That friendship just mentioned is truly suspect for many reasons. And those given over to comforts and prepared for much lukewarmness will not know clearly whether what they do is a venial or mortal sin. God deliver us from this lukewarmness. Since it seems to them that they do not commit the serious sins they see in others -- and such is not the state of perfect humility -- they judge these others to be wicked. It could be that these latter are much better because they weep over their sins with deep repentance and, perhaps, with a better purpose of amendment, which will result in their never offending the Lord in little or much. Those doing the judging, since it seems to them they don't do any of these bad things, give themselves greater latitude for their enjoyments. For the most part, they will recite their vocal prayers, but not very well, because their consciences are not so delicate.
22. There is another kind of friendship and peace our Lord begins to give some persons who are totally committed to not offending Him in anything, although they don't withdraw so much from the occasions. They have their times for prayer. Our Lord gives them tenderness and tears. Yet, they do not want to give up the enjoyments of this life. They want to live a good and well-ordered life, for they think it is beneficial for them to live here below with tranquility. Life bears with it many changes. They will be doing enough if they continue in the practice of virtue. But if they don't withdraw from the satisfactions and pleasures of the world, they will soon grow lax again in walking the Lord's path; there are great enemies we must defend ourselves against. Such, daughters, is not the friendship the bride desires; neither should you desire it. Turn away always from any little occasion, however small, if you want the soul to grow and live securely.
23. I don't know why I'm saying these things to you unless so that you will understand the dangers that lie in not turning resolutely from all worldly things. For if we do turn from them we will spare ourselves many faults and trials. There are so many ways in which our Lord begins to exchange friendship with souls that I don't think I would ever finish recounting the ones I've recognized, even though I am a woman. What would confessors or those who deal with them more particularly have to say? Indeed, some of those persons bewilder me, for it seems they have everything that is required for them to be friends of God. I shall tell you about one lady in particular, for it is not long ago that I spoke with her in a special way. She was very fond of receiving Communion frequently, never said anything bad about anyone, experienced devotion in her prayer, and lived in constant solitude because she was in her house by herself. She was so mild in her temperament that nothing said to her ever made her angry or say any bad word, for she was quite perfect. She had never married, nor was she now at an age in which she could, and she had undergone many contradictions along with having this peace. Since I saw all these virtues, it seemed to me they were effects of a very advanced soul and of deep prayer. And I esteemed this lady highly at the beginning because I didn't see her offend God and understood that she guarded against doing so.
24. After getting to know her I began to understand that all was peaceful as long as her self-interest was not affected. But when her own interests were at stake, her conscience was not so delicate, but actually easygoing. I learned that although she would suffer all the things that were said against her, she would not tolerate anything said against her reputation even in some tiny point concerning her honor or the esteem she thought was her due. She was so overcome by this misery, so eager to know everything that was said against these and so fond of her comfort that I was amazed how such a person could live even an hour. She embellished all this in such a way that it appeared free from sin. And taking into account the reasons she gave to justify some of her actions I think I would have tried to defend her if someone had blamed her. In other things it was quite obvious that she was wrong though perhaps this judgment came from not understanding her motives well. I was really bewildered. Almost everyone considered her to be a saint, although I observed that she must have been somewhat at fault for the persecutions she underwent. And I did not envy her manner of living and sanctity. Rather, she and two other souls that I have seen in this life -- for now I recall them -- who were saints in their own opinion, caused me more fear, after I spoke with them, then all the sinners I have seen. I beg the Lord to give us light.
25. Praise Him, daughters, very much for He brought you to the monastery where, however much the devil may do, we cannot be deceived as much as can those who live in their own homes. There are souls whom, it seems, nothing keeps from flying off to heaven; they seek perfection in everything -- in their opinion. But there is no one to inform them of their faults. In monasteries I have never seen this lack, for souls must do, not what they want, but what they are told. Instead, people living in their own homes cannot know their faults, even though they would like to because they want to please the Lord. For, in the end, what they do is their own will. And even though they may go against their own will sometimes, they do not exercise themselves so much in mortification. Let us exclude some persons to whom our Lord has given light for many years, for these persons seek someone who will inform them of their faults and to whom they may submit, and their great humility leads them to have little confidence in themselves, however learned they may be.
26. There are others who have left everything for the Lord and have neither house nor possessions, nor do they take pleasure in comfort -- on the contrary, they are penitential -- or in the things of the world, because the Lord has already given them light about how miserable these things are. But they are too attached to their honor. They would not want to do anything that was not really acceptable to men as well as to the Lord; great discretion and prudence. It is not always easy to reconcile these two, for the trouble is that without one's being aware the interests of the world almost always gain more than do those of God. These souls, for the most part, grieve over anything said against them. They do not embrace the cross but drag it along, and so it hurts and wearies them and breaks them to pieces. However, if the cross is loved, it is easy to bear; this is certain.
27. No, neither is this the friendship the bride seeks. As a result, my daughters, since you have done what I mentioned here first, be careful not to let yourself be overcome by the second thing. Everything should be wearisome to you; if you have given up the most (you have left the world, its comforts, joys, and riches, which, even though false, in the end are pleasing) what do your fear? Look how you fail to understand, for in order to free yourselves from some bitterness a word can cause you, you burden yourselves with a thousand worries and obligations. There are so many of these, if we want to please those who are in the world, that one can't bear mentioning them all or enlarging upon them, nor would I even know how.
28. There are other souls, and in speaking of them I'm going to conclude, for if you pay attention to what I have said you will understand many ways by which they begin to make progress and then falter on the road. I say "there are other souls," because no longer are they concerned about what people say or about their own honor. But these souls are not exercised in mortification and in denying their own will, and so they never get over their fear. Since they are determined to suffer everything, it may seem that the job is done. But in serious matters concerning the honor of the Lord their concern for their own honor revives. Yet, they don't seem to understand. They think they don't fear the world but fear God. They figure out how dangers might arise in that virtuous deeds could result in much evil. It seems the devil teaches them; a thousand years in advance they prophesy what could come; if doing so is necessary.
29. These are not souls of the kind that would do what St. Peter did, by throwing himself into the sea, or what many other saints did. In their calm they will draw souls to the Lord, but not by putting themselves in danger. Nor does the faith they have do much for them in their efforts to carry out their resolutions with deeds. One thing I have noticed; we see few in the world, outside of religious life, entrust their livelihood to God. I know only two persons. In religious life it is already known that there will be no lack -- although whoever truly enters for God alone, I believe, will not think of this. But how many there are, daughters, who will not give up what they have unless it be with security! In other writings where I have given you advice, I have spoken much about these pusillanimous souls and mentioned the harm their faintheartedness does them and how good it is for them to have great desires since they cannot do great works. I don't say any more about these, although I would never tire of doing so. Once the Lord brings them to so great a state, let them serve Him through it, and not be shy. For even if someone who is a religious -- especially a woman -- cannot help her neighbor, her prayer will be powerful if she has strong determination and ardent desires for souls. Even, perhaps, the Lord will desire that either in life or in death she will help others, as the holy friar Diego does now. He was a lay brother and did nothing more than serve; and after his death, so many years ago, his memory is revived by the Lord that he might be an example to us. Let us praise His Majesty!
30. Thus, my daughters, if the Lord has brought you to this state, little is lacking for you to receive the peace and friendship the bride asks for. Don't fail to beg the Lord for it with continual tears and desires. Do what you can for your part that He might give it to you. Realize that the religious state itself is not the peace and friendship the bride asks for, even though the Lord grants a great favor to the one He has brought to it. For only after one has been occupied in much prayer, penance, humility, and many other virtues, will that peace come. May the Lord always be praised for He gives all, amen.
