CHAPTER 3
 
Treats of the true peace God grants the soul and of His union with it. Gives some examples of the heroic charity of some servants of God.
 
Let Him kiss me with the kiss of His mouth. (Sg. 1:2)
 
1. O holy bride, let us turn to what you ask for: that holy peace which makes the soul, while remaining itself completely secure and tranquil, venture out to war against all worldly kinds of peace. Oh, how happy will be the lot of one who obtains this favor since it is a union with the will of God; such a union that there is no division between Him and the soul, but one same will. It is a union not based on words or desires alone, but a union proved by deeds. Thus, when the bride knows she is serving the Bridegroom in something, there is so much love and desire to please Him that she doesn't listen to the reasons the intellect will give her or to the fears it will propose. But she lets faith so work that she doesn't look for her own profit or rest; rather, she succeeds now in understanding that in this service lies all her profit.
2. It will seem to you, daughters, that this way of acting is not advisable, since doing things with discretion is so praiseworthy a practice. You must keep in mind one point: the Lord has heard your petition (from what you can understand, I mean, for one cannot know with certainty) that He kiss you with the kiss of His mouth. For if you know this through the effects of His having done so, there is no reason to delay in anything; but forget yourselves so as to please this most sweet Bridegroom. His Majesty gives many signs of Himself to those who enjoy this favor. One sign is contempt for all earthly things, in which they are judged to be as little as they in fact are. Another, not desiring one's own good, because one's own vanity is already understood. A third, not rejoicing except with those who love their Lord. Life becomes wearisome to these persons; their esteem is for the riches they merit. And there are other similar signs that He who placed them in this state teaches.
3. Once the soul has arrived here, it has nothing to fear except that God may not make use of it by giving it trials and the occasions for serving Him even at a great cost to itself. Hence, as I've said, love and faith are at work. And the soul does not want to benefit by what the intellect teaches it, for this union between the bride and Bridegroom has taught it other things the intellect cannot attain to, and the soul tramples the intellect underfoot.
Let us draw a comparison so that you may understand. There is a captive in the land of the Moors whose father is poor, but who has a good friend. If this friend doesn't ransom him, the captive has no means of liberation. What his friend possesses is not enough to pay the ransom, but the friend will have to go to serve in the captive's place. The great love the friend has makes him want freedom for the captive more than for himself. But then discretion comes along with many reasons and tells the friend that he is more obligated to himself and that he perhaps has less fortitude than the one who is now in captivity and that the Moors will make him lose faith, that it is not good to place oneself in this danger, and many other things.
4. Oh, strong love of God! And how true it is that nothing seems impossible to the one who loves! Oh, happy the soul that has obtained this peace from its God, for it is master over all the trials and dangers of the world, fears no one provided it serves so good a Spouse and Lord. Its reason to love Him is far greater than the reason the father and friend have for loving the captive. Well, daughters, you've already read about a saint who when a widow came to him in desolation went to the land of the Moors to exchange himself for her son. He did this not for a son or for a friend but because he must have truly arrived at this blessed state in which God must have given him this peace and so that he could please His Majesty and somehow imitate Him. You've also read how things turned out and how spiritually enriched this saint was when he returned from captivity.
5. [I would think that his mind did not fail to come up with some more reasons besides those I mentioned, because he was a bishop and would have had to abandon his flock, and perhaps he would have had fears. Consider one thing that comes to me now and is appropriate for those who are pusillanimous and weak in spirit -- for the most part they will be women. Although in truth their souls may have reached this state, their weak nature fears. It's necessary for us to be on guard because this natural weakness will make us lose a great crown. When you feel this pusillanimity, have recourse to faith and humility, and don't fail to go on fighting with faith, for God can do all. Thus He was able to give fortitude to many saintly girls, and He gave it so that they were able to suffer many torments, since they were determined to suffer for Him.
6. By means of this determination in the soul, the Lord desires to make it master of its own free will, for in no way does He need our strength. Rather, His Majesty enjoys having His works shine forth in weak people, for in them there is more room for His power to work and fulfill the desire He has to grant us favors. As a result, the virtues God has given you will help you act with determination and forget the reasons the intellect presents and your own weakness. These virtues will prevent this weakness from increasing when there are thoughts about what will or will not happen or thoughts, perhaps, that because of my own sins I will not deserve that He give me the fortitude He has given others. This isn't the time to think about your sins; leave them aside, as I have said. Such humility is inopportune right now and comes at the worst moment.
7. When others desire to give you something very honorable or when the devil incites you to a comfortable life or to other similar things, be afraid lest because of your sins you will not be able to bear these things with rectitude. And when you have to suffer something for our Lord or for your neighbor, do not be afraid of your sins. You could perform one of these works with so much charity that all your sins would be pardoned. The devil fears this, and that's why he reminds you of your sins at such a time. Be certain that the Lord will never fail His lovers, when they take a risk for Him alone. What they should watch out for are other selfish intentions, for I am not speaking except of those who aim after pleasing the Lord with the greatest perfection].
8. And now in our times, I know a person -- and you have seen him for he came to see me -- who was moved by the Lord with such great charity that it cost him many tears not to be able to go in exchange for a captive. He spoke of the matter to me -- he was one of the discalced followers of Friar Peter of Alcántara -- and after many urgent entreaties got the permission from his Father General. And when he was four leagues from Argel -- about to realize his good desire -- the Lord brought him to Himself. Surely he received a good reward. Well now how many discreet persons there were who told him his idea was crazy! For those of us who have not reached such love of God, it may seem so. And how much crazier it will be to come to the end of the dream that is this life with so much common sense! Please God we will merit to enter heaven; and, what is more, to be numbered among those who have advanced so far in the love of God.
9. Now I realize that God's great help is necessary for things like this. Consequently, I counsel you, daughters, always to ask with the bride for this peace that is so delightful. With it the soul will reign over all these little fears of the world. And peacefully and quietly the soul will conquer the world. Isn't it clear that the soul to whom God grants so great a favor as to join it with Himself in a friendship like this will be left truly rich in His blessings? For certainly these things cannot be ours. We can ask and desire that He grant us this favor -- and even the asking is done with His help. As for the rest, what power has a worm? Sin keeps it so cowardly and miserable that all the virtues we can imagine are appraised according to our lowly nature.
Well then, what is the remedy, daughters? To ask for what the bride asks for. If a peasant girl should marry the king and have children, don't the children have royal blood? Well, if our Lord grants so much favor to our soul that He joins Himself to it in this inseparable way, what desires, what effects, what heroic deeds will be born from it as offspring, if the soul be not at fault!
10. [Hence I repeat that in similar cases if the Lord should grant you the favor of offering you something to be done for Him that you pay no attention to the fact that you have been sinners. It is necessary here that faith master our misery and that you be not frightened if at the beginning in making the resolution, and even afterward, you feel fear and weakness. Pay no attention to these except to encourage yourselves more; don't interfere with the flesh. Behold what the good Jesus says in His prayer in the garden, the flesh is weak; and remember His admirable and sorrowful sweat. Now then, if His Majesty says that the divine and sinless flesh is weak, how is it we desire our flesh to be so strong that it doesn't feel the persecutions and the trials that can come to it? And in these very trials the flesh will be as though subject to the spirit. When the soul's will is joined to the will of God, the flesh does not complain.
11. The thought comes to me now that our good Jesus showed us the weakness of His humanity previous to the trials, and when He was in the abyss of His sufferings showed such great fortitude that He not only did not complain but did nothing that would make it appear He was suffering with weakness. When He went to the garden, He said: My soul is sorrowful even to death. Yet, while on the cross, for He was already suffering death, He did not complain. Nor did He do so when in the prayer of the garden He went to awaken His apostles. With greater reason might He have complained to His Mother and our Lady when she was at the foot of the cross, and not asleep but suffering in her most holy soul and dying a harsh death; it always consoles us more to complain to those who we know feel our trials and love us more.
12. So, let's not complain of fears or become discouraged at seeing our nature weak and without strength. Let us strive to strengthen ourselves with humility and understand clearly the little we ourselves can do and that if God does not favor us, we are nothing. Let us distrust completely our own strength and confide in His mercy, and until we attain this mercy our weakness will persist. Not without reason did our Lord show us His weakness, for it is clear that He was not weak since He was fortitude itself. But He did so for our consolation and that we might understand how it is fitting for us to carry out our desires with deeds. Let us observe that when the soul begins to mortify itself, everything is painful to it. If it begins to give up comforts, it grieves; if it must give up honor, it feels torment; and if it must suffer an offensive word, the hurt becomes intolerable for it. In sum, there are never lacking sorrows for it until death. But as it succeeds in its determination to die to the world, it will find itself freed of these sufferings; and, on the contrary, there will be no fear of its complaining any longer, for the peace the bride asks for will have been attained.]
13. Certainly, I think that if we were to approach the most Blessed Sacrament with great faith and love, once would be enough to leave us rich. How much richer from approaching so many times as we do. The trouble is we do so out of routine, and it shows. O miserable world, you have so covered the eyes of those who live in you that they do not see the treasures by which they could win everlasting riches!
14. O Lord of heaven and earth, how is it possible that even while in this mortal life one can enjoy You with so special a friendship, that the Holy Spirit says this so clearly in these words, and that still we do not want to understand that these are the delights You share with souls in this Song of Songs! What endearing words! What sweetness! One of these words would have been enough for us to be dissolved in You. May You be blessed, Lord, because we don't lose anything through Your fault. Along how many paths, in how many ways, by how many methods You show us love! With trials, with a death so harsh, with torments, suffering offenses every day and then pardoning; and not only with these deeds do You show this love, but with words so capable of wounding the soul in love with You that You say them in this Song of Songs and teach the souls what to say to You. For I don't know how the words can be endured if You do not help the one who hears them to bear them -- because of our weakness, not because of what the words deserve.
15. Hence, my Lord, I do not ask You for anything else in life but that You kiss me with the kiss of Your mouth, and that You do so in such a way that although I may want to withdraw from this friendship and union, my will may always, Lord of my life, be subject to Your will and not depart from it; that there be nothing to impede me from being able to say: "My God and my Glory, indeed, Your breasts are better and more delightful than wine."
