CHAPTER 4
 
Speaks of the prayer of quiet and of union and of the sweetness and delight they cause in the spirit; in comparison, earthly delights are nothing.
 
Your breasts are better than wine, and give forth the most sweet fragrance. (Sg. 1:2-3)
 
1. Oh, my daughters, what deep secrets there are in these words! May the Lord give us experience of them, for they are very difficult to explain.
When His Majesty, through His mercy, desires to answer the petition of the bride, He begins to commune with the soul in so friendly a way that only those who experience this friendship will understand it, as I say. I have written much about this in two books (which, if the Lord is pleased, you will see after my death) in a very detailed way and at length, for I see that you will need them. Thus, I will do no more here than touch upon the matter. I don't know whether I will succeed in using the same words by which the Lord wished to explain the matter there.
2. In the interior of the soul a sweetness is felt so great that the soul feels clearly the nearness of its Lord. This experience is not merely one of devotion moving a person to shed many tears -- which give satisfaction -- either by thinking of the Passion of the Lord or of our sins. In this prayer of which I speak, that I call "quiet" because of the calm caused in all the faculties (for it seems the person has them well under control -- although sometimes the experience is not like this, because the soul is not so absorbed in this sweetness), it seems that the whole man interiorly and exteriorly is comforted. It's as though there were poured into the marrow of one's bones a sweet ointment with a powerful fragrance. If we were suddenly to enter a place where this fragrance was strong and not from one thing but from many, and we did not know what it was or where it came from except that it permeated everything, we would have some idea of this most sweet love of our God. He enters the soul and does so with wonderful sweetness. He pleases and makes it happy, and it cannot understand how or from where that blessing enters. It would not want to lose that good; it would not want to stir or speak or even look lest the blessing go away.
3. [And this is what the bride says here according to my interpretation, that the breasts of the Bridegroom give forth fragrance greater than that of precious ointments.]
In these books I mentioned I spoke of what the soul must do in order to make progress, and my purpose here is solely to explain the type of prayer I am dealing with. Thus, I do not want to enlarge any more than to say that in this friendship (for the Lord now shows the soul that He loves it in so particular a way that there is nothing separating the two) great truths are communicated to the soul. For this light that dazzles the soul, since it is not understood, makes one see the vanity of the world. The soul doesn't see the good Master who teaches it, although it understands that He is with it. But it is left so well instructed, with such great effects and fortitude in the virtues, that it doesn't know itself afterward; nor would it want to do or say anything other than praise the Lord. While in this joy it is so enwrapped and absorbed that it doesn't seem to be within itself but in a kind of divine intoxication so that it doesn't know what it wants or what it says or what it asks for. In sum, it doesn't know itself; but it isn't outside itself to the extent that it fails to understand something of what is going on.
4. But when this most wealthy Bridegroom desires to enrich and favor the soul more, He changes it into Himself to such a point that, just as a person is caused to swoon from great pleasure and happiness, it seems to the soul it is left suspended in those divine arms, leaning on that sacred side and those divine breasts. It doesn't know how to do anything more than rejoice, sustained by the divine milk with which its Spouse is nourishing it and making it better so that He might favor it, and it might merit more each day.
When it awakens from that sleep and that heavenly inebriation, it remains as though stupefied and dazed and with a holy madness. It seems to me it can say these words: Your breasts are better than wine.
While it was in that intoxication, the soul thought it had no farther to ascend. But when it saw itself in a higher degree and completely drenched in the countless grandeurs of God, and sustained in this way, it makes a delicate comparison and says: Your breasts are better than wine.
An infant doesn't understand how it grows nor does it know how it gets its milk, for without its sucking or doing anything, often the milk is put into its mouth. Likewise, here, the soul is completely ignorant. It knows neither how nor from where that great blessing came to it, nor can it understand. It knows that the blessing is the greatest that can be tasted in life, even if all the delights and pleasures of the world were joined together. It sees that it is nourished and made better and doesn't know when it deserved this. It is instructed in great truths without seeing the Master who teaches it; fortified in virtues and favored by One who knows it well and can do these things for it. It doesn't know what to compare His grace to, unless to the great love a mother has for her child in nourishing and caressing it.
5. [This comparison is appropriate. For the soul is so elevated and beyond the ability to benefit from its intellect, that it is, in part, like an infant that delights in a caress but doesn't have an intellect by which to understand how that good comes. For in the sleep coming from the divine inebriation the soul is still functioning because it understands and does something. It understands that it is near its God, and thus it has reason for saying: Your breasts are better than wine.
6. Great is this favor, my Spouse; a pleasing feast. Precious wine do You give me, for with one drop alone You make me forget all of creation and go out from creatures and myself, so that I will no longer want the joys and comforts that my sensuality desired up until now. Great is this favor; I did not deserve it.
After His Majesty granted it a greater favor and brought it closer to Himself, it rightly says: Your breasts are better than wine. The past favor was a great one, my God, but much greater is this one because I do less in it, and thus it is in every way better. The joy and delight of the soul are great when it arrives here.]
7. Oh, my daughters, may our Lord give us understanding or, to put it better, a taste -- for there is no other way of being able to understand -- of what the soul's joy is in this state. Let worldly people worry about their lordships, riches, delights, honors, and food, for even if a person were able to enjoy all these things without the accompanying trials -- which is impossible -- he would not attain in a thousand years the happiness that in one moment is enjoyed by a soul brought here by the Lord. St. Paul says, all the trials of the world are not worthy to be compared with the glory which we await. I say that in addition, they are not worthy nor can they merit even one hour of this satisfaction, joy, and delight given here by God to the soul. There is no comparison between this delight and the baseness of worldly things, in my opinion. Nor can one merit so delightful a favor from our Lord, so intimate a union, or a love so destined to be experienced and felt. How ridiculous it would be to compare the trials of worldly people with those suffered here by the soul. If trials are not suffered for God, they are worth nothing; if they are suffered for Him, His Majesty adapts them to our strength. Thus, if we are so afraid of them it is because we are fainthearted and miserable.
8. Oh, Christians and my daughters! Let us now, for love of the Lord, awake from this sleep and behold that He does not keep the reward of loving Him for the next life alone. The pay begins in this life. O my Jesus, who could explain the benefit that lies in throwing ourselves into the arms of this Lord of ours and making an agreement with His Majesty that I look at my Beloved, and my Beloved at me, and that He look after my things and I look after His! Let's not, as the saying goes, love ourselves to death. I repeat, my God, and beg You through the blood of your Son that You grant me this favor: Let Him kiss me with the kiss of His mouth, for without You, what am I, Lord? If I am not close to You, what am I worth? If I stray a little from Your Majesty, where will I end up?
9. Oh, my Lord, my Mercy, and my Good! And what greater good could I want in this life than to be so close to You, that there be no division between You and me? With this companionship, what can be difficult? What can one not undertake for You, being so closely joined? What is there in me to be grateful for, my Lord? Rather, I must blame myself very much for my failure to serve You. And thus I beg You, with St. Augustine, and with full determination, that You "give me what You command and command what You will." Never, with Your favor and help, will I turn my back on You.
10. Now I see, my Bridegroom, that You are mine. I cannot deny it. You came into the world for me; for me You underwent severe trials; for me You suffered many lashes; for me You remain in the most Blessed Sacrament; and now You grant me so many wonderful favors. Well then, O most holy bride, with what ardor I have said what you say: "What can I do for my Spouse?"
11. [Indeed, Sisters, I don't know how to go on from here. How can I be Yours, my God? What can one who has used so unskillfully the favors You have granted do for You? What can be expected of her services? Since with Your help she does something, consider what a poor worm will be able to do. Why does a Lord so powerful need her? Oh, love! How I would want to say this word everywhere because love alone is that which can dare say with the bride, I am my Beloved's. He gives us permission to think that He, this true Lover, my Spouse and my Good, needs us.
12. Since He gives us permission, let us repeat, daughters, my Beloved is mine and I am my Beloved's. You are mine, Lord? If you come to me, why do I doubt that I will be able to serve You? From here on, Lord, I want to forget myself and look only at how I can serve You and have no other desire than to do Your will. But my desire is not powerful, my God; You are the powerful One. What I can do is be determined; thus from this very moment I am determined to serve You through deeds.]
