CHAPTER 6
 
Treats of how the benefits of this loving union surpass all the desires of the bride. Speaks of the suspension of the faculties and tells how some souls reach this sublime prayer in a short time.
 
The King brought me into the wine cellar and set charity in order within me. (Sg. 2:4)
 
1. Well, now that the soul is resting under the longed-for shadow, and rightly so, what is left for it to desire unless that it never lack this good? It doesn't think there is anything more to desire. But our most sacred King has still much to give. He would never want to do anything else than give if He could find receivers. And as I have said often -- I want you never to forget, daughters -- the Lord is never content with giving us as little as we desire; I have seen it here. He grants the soul in answer to some of its petitions an opportunity to merit and suffer something for Him, whereas the soul's intention was to suffer only what its strength could bear. Since His Majesty can make one's strength increase in payment for the little that one determines to do for Him, He will give so many trials and persecutions and illnesses that a poor man won't know himself.
2. This happened to me when I was quite young. Sometimes I would say, "Oh, Lord, I didn't want so much." But His Majesty gave strength and patience in such a way that even now I am amazed at how I was able to suffer, and I would not exchange those trials for all the world's treasures.
The bride says: The King brought me. How appropriate this name, "powerful King," is, for the Lord has no superior, nor will His reign ever end. Surely the soul in such a state will understand much about the greatness of this King; but not everything since that is impossible in this mortal life.
3. She says: He brought me into the wine cellar; set charity in order within me. I understand from these words the grandeur of this favor. For a greater or less amount can be given a person to drink, a good or a better wine, and the wine will leave him more or less inebriated and intoxicated. So with the favors of the Lord; to one He gives a little wine of devotion, to another more, with another He increases it in such a way that the person begins to go out from himself, from his sensuality, and from all earthly things; to some He gives great fervor in His service; to others, impulses of love; to others, great charity toward their neighbors. These gifts are given in such a way that these persons go about so stupefied they do not feel the great trials that take place here. But much is contained in what the bride says. He brings her into the wine cellar so that she may come out more abundantly enriched. It doesn't seem the King wants to keep anything from her. He wants her to drink in conformity with her desire and become wholly inebriated, drinking of all the wines in God's storehouse. Let the soul rejoice in these joys. Let it admire God's grandeurs. Let it not fear to lose its life from drinking so much beyond what its natural weakness can endure. Let it die in this paradise of delights. Blessed be such a death that so makes one live! And truly this is what it makes the soul do. For the marvels the soul understands are so great -- without its understanding how it understands -- that it remains outside itself. The bride refers to this in saying: He set charity in order within me.
4. Oh, words that should never be forgotten by the soul to whom the Lord gives delight! Oh, sovereign favor! How impossible it is to deserve if the Lord does not give the wealth required for it. Indeed the soul does not even find itself awake in order to love. But blessed sleep, happy inebriation that makes the Bridegroom supply for what the soul cannot do; that is, set up so wonderful an order. For while the faculties are dead or asleep, love remains alive. And the Lord ordains that the soul function so wonderfully, without its understanding how, that it is made one, in great purity, with the very Lord of love, who is God. For no one hinders the soul, neither senses nor faculties (I mean intellect and memory), nor is the will aware of itself.
5. I was wondering now whether there is some difference between the will and love. And it seems to me there is. I don't know whether or not I'm speaking foolishly. But it seems to me that love is like an arrow sent forth by the will. If it travels with all the force that the will has, freed from all earthly things, and directed to God alone, it truly must wound His Majesty. Thus, fixed in God Himself, who is love, it is brought back from there with the greatest gain, as I shall say. I have been informed by some persons whom our Lord has brought to this great favor in prayer that He brings them to this holy inebriation with a suspension and that even exteriorly one can see they are not in themselves. When I ask what they feel, they are completely unable to explain; nor could they know how to do so, nor would they be able to understand anything of how love works there.
6. The tremendous gain drawn from this kind of prayer is clearly recognized through the effects, the virtues, the living faith and the contempt for the world left in the soul. But since these blessings and what the soul enjoys here are gifts, nothing is understood -- except at the beginning -- for the sweetness is very great. Thus what the bride says is clear: that is, the wisdom of God supplies here for the soul, and He ordains the way in which it gains these marvelous favors during that time. Since it is so outside itself and so absorbed that it can do nothing with the faculties, how can it merit? Well, is it possible for God to grant it a favor so great that it wastes time and gains nothing in Him? No, I don't think so.
7. Oh, secrets of God! Here there is no more to do than surrender our intellects and reflect that they are of no avail when it comes to understanding the grandeurs of God. It is good to recall here how God acted with the Blessed Virgin, our Lady. In spite of all her wisdom she asked the angel: How can this be? But after he answered, The Holy Spirit will come upon you; the power of the Most High will overshadow you, she engaged in no further discussion. As one who had such great faith and wisdom, she understood at once that if these two intervened, there was nothing more to know or doubt. She did not act as do some learned men (whom the Lord does not lead by this mode of prayer and who haven't begun in life of prayer), for they want to be so rational about things and so precise in their understanding that it doesn't seem anyone else but they with their learning can understand the grandeurs of God. If only they would learn something from the humility of the most Blessed Virgin!
8. O Blessed Lady, how perfectly we can apply to you what takes place between God and the bride according to what is said in the Song of Songs. And thus you can see, daughters, in the Office of our Lady, which we recite each week, how much in its antiphons and readings is taken from this Song of Songs. As for other souls, each one can understand according to the understanding God wants to give him, for he will see very clearly if he is receiving some of these favors, similar to what the bride says: He set charity in order within me. For souls that receive this favor do not know where they were, or how through a delight so sublime they could have pleased the Lord, or what they were doing since they did not give Him thanks for it.
9. O soul, beloved of God! Do not be anxious when His Majesty brings you here and speaks so endearingly; as you will see in many words that He says to the bride in the Song of Songs, such as: You are all beautiful, my love, and many others, as I say. But these He shows He is happy with her. Thus you should believe that He will not consent to your being displeasing to Him at that time, but He will help you in what you might not have known so that He may be more pleased with you. He sees the soul lost to itself, transported so as to love Him, and that love's very force has taken away the intellect in order that the soul may love more. Indeed, His Majesty is not wont to fail nor can He fail to give Himself to the one who has given Him everything, nor could He endure not doing so.
10. It seems to me His Majesty is embellishing with His gifts this gold He has prepared and tested so as to see how many carats the soul's love is. These gifts are bestowed in a thousand ways and modes of which only the soul having arrived here will be able to speak. This soul, which is the gold, no more moves or works during this time than if it were in fact gold. And divine Wisdom, happy to see it thus (since there are so few who love Him with this strength) makes a thousand designs in the gold with inlays of precious stones and enamels.
11. Well now, this soul, what does it do at this time? This is what cannot be understood or known beyond what the bride says: He set charity in order within me. The soul, at least if it loves, does not know how nor does it understand what it loves. The King's most intense love, which has brought the soul to this high state, must have joined this soul's love to itself in such a way that the intellect does not deserve to understand; but these two loves become one again. Since the soul's love is brought so truly close to the love of God, how can the intellect reach that far? The intellect loses sight at that time, for the union never lasts long, but is brief. And there God sets love in order in such a way that it then knows well how to please His Majesty and even afterward, without understanding on the part of the intellect, as was said. But the intellect understands well afterward when it sees this soul with the enamel and inlays of precious stones and pearls of virtue, for it is amazed and can say: Who is this that is as bright as the sun?
O true King, and how right the bride was in giving You this name! For in a moment You can give riches and place them in a soul that they may be enjoyed forever. How well ordered love is in this soul!
12. I shall be able to give good examples of this because I have met some persons in this stage of prayer. I now remember one of them. Within three days the Lord gave her such blessings that were it not for my experience with her for some years and my seeing her always improve, I would not have believed the blessings possible. And I saw Him do the same for another within three months; and both were quite young. Others I have seen to whom God grants this favor after a long time. I have mentioned these two -- and I could mention some others -- because I have written here that few are those to whom our Lord grants these favors without their having undergone many years of trials, and thus it may be understood that there are some exceptions. One must not place limits on a Lord so great and desirous to grant favors. I am speaking of true favors from God, not of illusions or of the results of melancholy or of our own natural efforts. Only time will tell where the favors come from. When they are from God the virtues grow so strong and love becomes so enkindled that there's no concealing the two. Even without any specific desire on the part of the soul, they always bring profit to other souls.
13. The King set charity in order within me, set it in order so well that the love the soul had for the world is taken away; the soul's love of itself turns to disregard; its love for its relatives is such that it loves them solely for God; its love for its neighbors and its enemies is unbelievable unless experienced -- a very strong love; its love of God is boundless, for sometimes the love impels it so much that its lowly nature cannot endure the love. And since the soul sees that it is now growing weak and about to die, it says: Sustain me with flowers; surround me with apples for I am dying with the sickness of love.
