CHAPTER 7
 
Explains the bride's strong desires to suffer much for God and neighbor and the abundant fruits that come to the Church from souls favored by the divine union and detached from self-interest.
 
Sustain me with flowers and surround me with apples, for I am dying of love. (Sg. 2:5)
 
1. Oh, how well this divine language applies to what I want to speak of here! Holy bride, how is it that this sweetness slays you! From what I have known, sometimes the delight is so excessive that it seems to dissolve the soul in such a way that there is no longer any desire to live. And do you ask for flowers? What flowers will these be? Flowers will provide no remedy unless you ask for them so as to die, for in truth nothing else is desired when the soul arrives here. But this interpretation doesn't fit well because the bride says: sustain me with flowers. Asking to be sustained doesn't seem to me to involve a request for death but for life and the desire to serve in some way the One to whom she sees she owes so much.
2. Don't think, daughters, there is any exaggeration in saying that she dies. As I have said, it indeed happens that love sometimes operates with such force that it rules over all the powers of the natural subject. Thus, I know a person who while in this kind of prayer heard someone, with a beautiful voice, singing; and she certifies that, in her opinion, if the singing had not stopped the soul would have gone out of itself on account of the great delight and sweetness the Lord gave it to enjoy. His Majesty provided that the singing stop, for the one who was in this suspension could easily have died. But because she was powerless to stir or make any exterior movement, she couldn't tell the one singing to stop. And she was clearly aware of the danger she was in, but her state resembled that of some one in a deep sleep who is unable to come out of it and speak even though he may want to.
3. In this suspension the soul would not want to come out of this sleep, nor would death be painful to it but great happiness, for this is what it desires. And how happy a death it would be, at the hands of this love! But sometimes His Majesty gives it light to see that living is good for it. However, the soul sees that its natural weakness will not be able to suffer that good for long if the delight lasts, and begs Him for another good so as to escape from that one that is so extraordinary, and thus it says: sustain me with flowers.
The fragrance of these flowers is different from the fragrance of flowers we smell here below. I understand by these words that the soul is asking to perform great works in the service of our Lord and of its neighbor. For this purpose it is happy to lose that delight and satisfaction. Although a person's life will become more active than contemplative, and one will seemingly lose if the petition is granted, Martha and Mary never fail to work almost together when the soul is in this state. For in the active -- and seemingly exterior -- work the soul is working interiorly. And when the active works rise from this interior root, they become lovely and very fragrant flowers. For they proceed from this tree of God's love and are done for Him alone, without any self-interest. The fragrance from these flowers spreads to the benefit of many. It is a fragrance that lasts, not passing quickly, but having great effect.
4. I want to explain myself further so that you understand. Someone preaches a sermon with the intention of benefitting souls, but he is not so detached from human considerations that he doesn't make some attempt to please, or to gain honor or credit; or he had his mind set on receiving some canonry for having preached well. There are also other things people do for their neighbor's benefit -- many things -- and with a good intention, but with much care not to lose anything through them and not to displease. They fear persecution; they want to be pleasing to kings, lords, and the people; they proceed with the discretion the world so much honors. This discretion is a shelter for many imperfections; they call it "discretion," and please God it will be.
5. These persons will serve His Majesty, and they profit much. But, in my opinion, such are not the works and flowers asked for by the bride; she looks only for the honor and glory of God in everything. Truly, I don't believe that souls brought to this state by the Lord, from what I have understood of some, think of themselves, and of whether they will lose or gain, any more than if they did not exist. They look only at serving and pleasing the Lord. And because they know the love He has for His servants, they like to leave aside their own satisfaction and good so as to please Him and serve and tell souls beneficial truths by the best means they can. Nor do they, as I say, think about whether or not they will themselves lose. They keep before their minds the benefit of their neighbor, nothing else. So as to please God more, they forget themselves for their neighbor's sake, and they lose their lives in the challenge, as did many martyrs. They are not aware of the words they say while enveloped in so sublime a love of God, in their inebriation from that heavenly wine. And if they are aware, they don't care if they displease men. These souls do much good.
6. I recall now what I have often thought concerning that holy Samaritan woman, for she must have been wounded by this herb. How well she must have taken into her heart the words of the Lord, since she left the Lord for the gain and profit of the people of her village. This explains well what I am saying. And in payment for her great charity, she merited to be believed and to see the wonderful good our Lord did in that village.
It seems to me that one of the greatest consolations a person can have on earth must be to see other souls helped through his own efforts. Then, it seems to me, one eats the delicious fruit of these flowers. Happy are those to whom the Lord grants these favors. These souls are indeed obligated to serve Him. This holy woman, in that divine intoxication, went shouting through the streets. What amazes me is to see how the people believed her -- a woman. And she must not have been well-off since she went to draw water. Indeed she was very humble because when the Lord told her faults to her she didn't become offended (as the world does now, for the truth is hard to bear), but she told Him that He must be a prophet. In sum, the people believed her; and a large crowd, on her word alone, went out of the city to meet the Lord.
7. So I say that much good is done by those who, after speaking with His Majesty for several years, when receiving His gifts and delights, want to serve in laborious ways even though these delights and consolations are thereby hindered. I say that the fragrance of these flowers and works produced and flowing from the tree of such fervent love lasts much longer. One of these souls does more good with its words and works than do many others whose works carry the dust of our sensuality and some self-interest.
8. From these flowers comes the fruit, the apples of which the bride then says: Surround me with apples. Give me trials, Lord; give me persecutions. And truly this soul desires them and indeed passes through them well. For since it no longer looks to its own satisfaction but to what pleases God, its pleasure is in somehow imitating the laborious life that Christ lived.
By the "apple tree," I understand the tree of the cross because it is said in another verse in the Song of Songs: under the apple tree I raised you up. And a soul that is surrounded by crosses, trials, and persecutions has a powerful remedy against often continuing in the delight of contemplation. It finds great delight in suffering; but suffering doesn't consume it and waste its strength, as would this suspension, if very frequent, of the faculties in contemplation. And the soul also has another reason for making this request, for it must not be always enjoying without serving and working in something. I notice in some persons -- there are not many because of our sins -- that the more they advance in this kind of prayer and the gifts of our Lord the more attention they pay to the needs of their neighbor, especially to the needs to their neighbors' souls. For to draw one soul away from mortal sin it seems such persons would give many lives, as I said at the beginning.
9. Who will make those to whom our Lord begins to give these delights believe this? But perhaps it will seem to them that such persons are not making good use of their lives and that to remain in a corner enjoying this delight is what is important. It belongs to the Lord's providence, in my opinion, that these beginners do not understand where these other souls are because with this initial fervor they would immediately want to leap forward to that stage. But such a quick move ahead does not suit them, for they are still not weaned. It's necessary that they be nourished some days more with the milk I mentioned at the beginning. Let them remain close to those divine breasts, for the Lord will take care, when they are strong, to bring them further. Otherwise, they would not do the good they think; rather they would harm themselves. Since in the book I mentioned you will find very detailed explanations about when a soul may go out to benefit others and about the danger that lies in going out ahead of time, I do not want to mention the matter here or enlarge upon this any more. When I began, my intention was simply to explain how you can find comfort when you hear some words from the Song of Songs, and how, even though they are obscure to your understanding, you can reflect upon the profound mysteries contained in them. It would be bold of me to go on at any greater length.
10. May it please the Lord that what I have said may not have been bold. The work has been done to obey the one who commanded me to do it. May His Majesty be served in everything. If something good is here, you can indeed believe that it does not come from me; the Sisters here with me have seen that because of my many occupations I have written this hastily. Beseech His Majesty that I may understand through experience what has been said. Any Sister who thinks she has some experience of these delights should praise our Lord and ask Him for the latter-mentioned works and trials so that the gain will not be just for herself.
May it please our Lord to keep us in His hands and teach us always how to carry out His will, amen.
