1. Jesus be with you, my daughter. Your messenger is such a great traveler that although I thought he would arrive from Madrid tomorrow -- for I sent him there not knowing with whom I could entrust these business matters -- he returned today, Thursday. Together with your letter, I have to respond to some letters from Avila, so I won't be able to send them off until tomorrow at noon. Neither my eyes nor my head are up to doing any better; and please God the messenger will be able to leave tomorrow. I would have preferred to write to you at a leisurely pace and to Señora Doña María. Now I am almost well, for the syrup about which I am writing to our padre relieved me of that torment of melancholy and I think it also took away the fever completely.
2. The letter you sent written in your own hand made me laugh a little, for the melancholy had gone away. Don't tell Padre Fray Domingo, for I'm writing him a humorous letter; perhaps he will show it to you. I was certainly delighted with his letter and with yours, and even more so with yours in learning how that saint is now at rest and of her beautiful death. I am amazed that anyone could be grieving rather than envying her for such a great blessing. I am sorry about the great trial you have had, my daughter, and still must endure with so many business affairs and such important ones, for I know what it is. But I don't think you would feel any better if you had the quiet you speak of, but worse. Of this I am very certain, for I know your temperament and I accept the fact that you will have to suffer trials because in one way or another you must become a saint; and this desire you have for solitude is better than having the solitude.
3. Oh, if you could see the agitation going on -- although in secret -- in favor of the discalced friars. It is something to praise the Lord for. And it was all stirred up by those who went to Andalusia -- Gracián and Mariano. My delight is greatly tempered by the grief this will give our Father General, since I care for him so much. On the other hand, I see that without such favor we would be lost. Pray for this whole affair. Padre Fray Domingo will tell you what is happening and you will also find this out from some papers I am sending you. Whatever you write to me, you must send with a trustworthy person, very trustworthy; this is something most important, even if you have to delay sending it for a few days. It is to our disadvantage that Father Visitator is so far away. There are business matters that I believe I will have to send him by messenger, whatever the cost, for the substitute superior would not be able to handle matters like these. May Father Visitator be our superior for many years.
4. With regard to Padre Medina, have no fears; even if it were something worse I wouldn't be disturbed -- rather it made me laugh. I would be more sensitive to even a half word from Padre Domingo. This other one doesn't owe me anything, so I am not bothered that he cares little for me. He has never dealt with these monasteries so he doesn't know our situation. He cannot be equated with Fray Domingo who loves them as if they were his own and who has truly sustained them. You have had a real tumult to contend with, but there isn't a prioress who would not do the same for her house.
5. My best regards to Doña María de Samaniego and tell her that this world makes us realize that we can trust only in God. I believe all that you write about her and her sister. But it's good that more was not done, for we have to be grateful, and it would have shown a terrible lack of gratitude even to the bishop. As time goes on, the Lord will arrange matters in another way and we will be able to do something for the consolation of those ladies; I saw clearly that it would not please Señora Doña María. I thought of writing to her; I don't think it will be possible. Doña María Cibrián is dead; commend her soul to God. Send my fond regards to the prioress at the monastery of the Mother of God, for much charity has been shown us here through her recommendation. And since I am not up to writing on account of my eyes, ask her to pardon my not writing. Take care of your health, for I wouldn't want you to have to pay for all the trouble and the bad nights you've had.
6. Oh, how I long to travel up there some day, for we are not far away, but I don't see how this will be possible. Regards to my Casilda. If you think it appropriate, let her read the enclosed letter from her aunt, for I sent her aunt the one Casilda wrote to me. For some time I have been close to her and I would trust her in any matter. I think I've forgotten something. God be with you and may he who binds us in such intimate friendship preserve you for me. I don't know how I bear that close friendship you have with my padre. See how you have fooled me; I think you are a great servant of God. May he make you a saint.
Today is 14 May.
7. Tell my good María de la Cruz that I long to see her, and also Estefanía. Pablo Hernández was amazed by her, and he is right.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
8. I have just learned of the counsels that Isabel de San Pablo is giving you -- she made me laugh with her monasteries. She lifted my spirits in the midst of this sickness of mine; her temperament and good humor brought me joy and enlivened and helped me to pray. I assure you she will show great ability in everything else, and if she has the health she could easily be entrusted with the charge of a monastery.
