Prologue
 
JHS
 
1. Apart from what I have read in many places, I have seen through experience the great good that comes to a soul when it does not turn aside from obedience. It is through this practice that I think one advances in virtue and gains humility. In obedience lies security against that dread (which for us as mortals living in this life is a good thing) that we might stray from the path to heaven. Here one finds the quietude that is so precious in souls desiring to please God. For if they have truly resigned themselves through the practice of this holy obedience and surrendered the intellect to it, not desiring any other opinion than their confessor's (or, if they are religious, their superior's), the devil will cease attacking with his continual disturbances. He will have seen that he is losing rather than gaining. Also, those restless stirrings within us, which make us fond of doing our own will and which even subdue reason in matters concerning our own satisfaction, come to a stop. Those who practice obedience remember that they resolutely surrendered their own will to God's will, using submission to the one who stands in God's place as a means to this surrender.
Because His Majesty, in His goodness, has given me light to know the rich treasure contained in this precious virtue, I have striven -- although weakly and imperfectly -- to obtain it. Yet, often the small amount of virtue I see in myself contradicts what I just said. For with some things they command me to do I realize that such striving doesn't suffice. May the divine Majesty provide what is lacking for the accomplishment of this present task.
2. While in St. Joseph's in Avila in the year 1562, the same year in which the monastery was founded, I was ordered by Fr. García de Toledo, a Dominican, who at the time was my confessor, to write of that monastery's foundation, along with many other things; whoever sees that work, if it is published, will learn there of those events. Now here in Salamanca, in the year 1573, eleven years later, my confessor, a Father Rector from the Society, whose name is Maestro Ripalda, having seen this book of the first foundation, thought it would be of service to our Lord if I wrote about the other seven monasteries that were since founded through the goodness of the Lord, and also about the first monastery of the discalced Fathers of this ancient order. And so he commanded me to write this. It seemed impossible for me to do so because I was so busy, both with correspondence and with other necessary occupations ordered by my superiors. I was recommending myself to God and somewhat distressed for being so useless and in such poor health. Even without this feeling of being useless, it often seemed to me because of my poor health and my lowly natural inclinations that I wouldn't be able to bear doing this work. While I was in this prayer, the Lord said to me: "Daughter, obedience gives strength."
3. May it please His Majesty that this be so, and may He grant me the grace to be able to recount for His glory the favors that through these foundations He has granted this order. One can be certain that this account will be given in all truthfulness, without any exaggeration, in so far as possible, but in conformity with what has taken place. For even in something of very little importance I wouldn't tell a lie for anything in the world. In this work that is being written for the praise of our Lord, any untruthfulness would cause me great scrupulosity. I believe that such a thing would involve not only a waste of time but deception concerning the works of God, and instead of being praised for them He would be offended. It would be a great betrayal. So that I might accomplish this task, may it please His Majesty not to let me out of His hand.
Each foundation will be expressly mentioned. And I will try to be brief, for my style is so heavy that although I may want to be brief, I fear that I will become tiresome and tire even myself. But because of the love my daughters have for me, they who will possess this work after my days are done will be able to put up with the style.
4. I do not seek my own benefit in anything, nor do I have any reason to do so, but only His glory and praise, for many things will be seen for which glory and praise should be given Him. Thus may it please our Lord that anyone who reads this will not think of attributing praise to me, since to do so would be against the truth. Rather, let readers ask His Majesty to pardon me for the poor way in which I have benefited from all these favors. There is much greater reason for my daughters to complain about this defect than to thank me for what has been done through these favors. Let us, my daughters, give all our thanks to the divine goodness for the many favors He has granted us. I ask the reader to recite a Hail Mary out of love for Him that it may help me to leave purgatory and reach the vision of Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with the Father and the Holy Spirit, forever and ever, amen.
5. Since I have a poor memory, I believe that many very important things will be left unsaid and that other things will be said that could be omitted. In sum, the work will be in accord with my lack of intelligence and culture and my lack also of the quiet necessary for writing. They also are ordering me, if the occasion offers itself, to deal with some things about prayer and how, by being deceived, those who practice it could be kept from making progress.
6. In all things I submit to what the holy Roman Church holds, with the resolve that before this work reaches your hands, my Sisters and daughters, learned and spiritual persons will see it. I begin in the name of the Lord, taking for my help His glorious Mother, whose habit I wear, although unworthily, and also my glorious father and lord, St. Joseph, in whose house I am, for he is the patron of this monastery of discalced nuns, through whose prayer I have been continually helped.
7. In the year 1573, feastday of St. Louis, king of France, which is August 24. May God be praised!
=
