CHAPTER 1

Begins With the Foundation of the Carmel of St. Joseph in Medina del Campo 
On the circumstances surrounding the beginning of both this foundation and the others.
 
1. From what I can understand now, the five years I spent in St. Joseph's in Avila after its foundation seem to me to have been the most restful of my life, and my soul often misses that calm and quiet. During those years some young religious women entered, whom the world, apparently, had already held in its grasp as was manifested in their display of its elegant and fashionable dress. Drawing them quickly away from those vanities, the Lord brought them to His house, endowing them with so much perfection that it was to my embarrassment. He did this until the number reached thirteen, which had been set as the maximum number.
2. It was a delight for me to be among souls so holy and pure, whose only concern was to serve and praise our Lord. His Majesty sent us what was necessary without our asking for it; and when we were in want, which was seldom, their joy was greater. I praised our Lord to see so many lofty virtues, especially the detachment they had from everything but serving Him. I, who was the superior there, never remember worrying about the necessities of life. I was convinced that the Lord would not fail those who had no other concern than to please Him. And if at times there wasn't enough food for everyone and I said that what there was should go to those most in need, each one thought that she could do without, and so the food remained until God sent enough for everyone.
3. With respect to the virtue of obedience, to which I am very devoted (although I didn't know how to practice it until those servants of God so taught me that I couldn't be ignorant as to whether or not I possessed it), I could mention many things that I saw there. One thing comes to mind now, and the incident came about in the refectory one day when they served us helpings of cucumbers. My portion consisted of one that was very thin and rotten inside. Secretly, I called a Sister, one of those with greater intelligence and talents, to test her obedience and told her to go and plant the cucumber in a little vegetable garden we had. She asked me if she should plant it upright or sideways. I told her sideways. She went out and planted it, without the thought entering her mind that the cucumber would only dry up. Rather, since she planted it out of obedience, she blinded natural reason so as to believe that what she did was very appropriate.
4. It occurred to me to charge one of them with six or seven contradictory duties. She undertook them, remaining silent, thinking it would be possible for her to do them all. There was a well with very bad water according to those who tried it, and it seemed impossible for the water to flow since the well was very deep. When I called some workmen to dig a new one, they laughed at me as though I were wanting to throw money away. I asked the Sisters what they thought. One said that it should be tried, that since our Lord would have to provide someone to bring us water as well as food, it would be cheaper for His Majesty to give us the well on the grounds of the house and that thus He would not fail to do so. Observing the great faith and determination with which she said it, I became certain. And, contrary to the opinion of the one who understood all about founts and water, I went ahead. And the Lord was pleased that we were able to put in a conduit which provided enough water for our needs, and for drinking, and which we now have.
5. I do not present this as a miracle, for there are other things I could tell, but to show the faith these Sisters had since the things did happen in the way I tell them. Nor is it my first intention to praise the nuns of these monasteries, for through the goodness of the Lord, all of them act in this way. And of these things and many others one could write at length, and with benefit, for at times those who follow will be inspired to imitate these Sisters. But if the Lord should desire this to be known, the superiors will command the prioresses that they write of it.
6. Well now, this wretched one was among these angelic souls. They didn't seem to me to be anything else, for there was no fault they hid from me, even if interior. And the favors, and ardent desires, and detachment the Lord gave them were great. Their consolation was their solitude. They assured me that they never tired of being alone, and thus they felt it a torment when others came to visit them, even if these were their brothers. The one who had the greater opportunity to remain in a hermitage considered herself the luckiest. In considering the real value of these souls and the courage God gave them to serve and suffer for Him, certainly not a characteristic of women, I often thought that the riches God placed in them were meant for some great purpose. What was later to come about never passed through my mind, because it didn't seem then to be something possible. There was no basis for even being able to imagine it, although my desires to be of some help to some soul as time went on had grown much greater. And I often felt like one who has a great treasure stored up and desires that all enjoy it, but whose hands are bound and unable to distribute it. So it seemed my soul was bound because the favors the Lord was granting it during those years were very great, and I thought that I was not putting them to good use. I tried to please the Lord with my poor prayers and always endeavored that the Sisters would do the same and dedicate themselves to the good of souls and the increase of His Church. Whoever conversed with them was always edified. And these were the things with which my great desires were fully taken up.
7. Four years later, or, I think, a little more than that, a Franciscan friar happened to come to see me, whose name was Fray Alonso Maldonado, a great servant of God, who had the same desires for the good of souls as I, but he was able to transfer them into deeds for which I envied him greatly. He had recently come back from the Indies. He began to tell me about the many millions of souls that were being lost there for want of Christian instruction, and before leaving he gave us a sermon, or conference, encouraging us to do penance. I was so grief-stricken over the loss of so many souls that I couldn't contain myself. I went to a hermitage with many tears. I cried out to the Lord, begging him that he give me the means to be able to do something to win some souls to His service, since the devil was carrying away so many, and that my prayer would do some good since I wasn't able to do anything else. I was very envious of those who for love of our Lord were able to be engaged in winning souls, though they might suffer a thousand deaths. And thus it happens to me that when we read in the lives of the saints that they converted souls, I feel much greater devotion, tenderness, and envy than over all the martyrdoms they suffered. This is the inclination the Lord has given me, for it seems to me that He prizes a soul that through our diligence and prayer we gain for Him, through His mercy, more than all the services we can render Him.
8. Well, going about with such great affliction, while I was in prayer one night, our Lord represented Himself to me in His usual way. He showed me much love, manifesting His desire to comfort me, and said: "Wait a little, daughter, and you will see great things."
These words remained so fixed in my heart that I could not forget them. No matter how much I thought about this promise I couldn't figure out how it would be possible, nor was there a way of even imagining how it could come about. Nevertheless, I remained very much consoled and certain that these words would prove true. But the means by which they eventually did never entered my mind. Thus another half year, I think, passed, and afterward there took place what I shall now describe.

CHAPTER 2
 
How our Father General came to Avila and what followed from his visit.
 
1. Our generals always reside in Rome and none ever came to Spain. So it seemed impossible that one should come now. But since nothing is impossible when our Lord wants it, His Majesty ordained that what had never happened before should come about now. When I came to know of it, I felt grieved. For as was already mentioned concerning the foundation of St. Joseph's, that house was not subject to the friars for the reason given. I feared two things: one, that our Father General would be displeased with me (and rightly so since he was unaware of how the things had come to pass); the other, that he would order me to return to the monastery of the Incarnation, where the mitigated rule is observed, which for me would have been an affliction for many reasons -- there would be no point in going into them. One reason should be enough: that in the Incarnation I wouldn't be able to observe the austerity of the primitive rule, that the community numbers more than 150, and that where there are few there is more harmony and quiet. Our Lord did better than I had imagined. For the general is such a servant of the Lord, and so discreet and learned, that he regarded the work as good; moreover he showed no displeasure toward me. His name is Fray Juan Bautista Rubeo de Ravenna, a person very distinguished in the order, and rightly so.
2. Well then, when he arrived in Avila, I arranged that he come to St. Joseph's. And the bishop thought it well that he be given all the welcome that the bishop himself would receive. I gave our Father General an account in all truth and openness, for it is my inclination to speak thus with my superiors, whatever might happen, since they stand in the place of God -- and with confessors, the same. If I didn't do this, it wouldn't seem to me that my soul was secure. And so I gave him an account of my soul and of almost my whole life, although it is very wretched. He consoled me much and assured me that he wouldn't order me to leave St. Joseph's.
3. He rejoiced to see our manner of life, a portrait, although an imperfect one, of the beginnings of our order, and how the primitive rule was being kept in all its rigor, for it wasn't being observed in any monastery in the entire order; only the mitigated rule was observed. And with the desire he had that this beginning go forward, he gave me very extensive patent letters, so that more monasteries could be founded, along with censures to prevent any provincial from restraining me. I did not ask for these, but he understood from my way of prayer that my desires to help some soul come closer to God were great.
4. I was not seeking these means; rather the thought seemed to me foolish because a useless little woman as helpless as I well understood that she couldn't do anything. But when these desires come to a soul, it is not in its power to put them aside. Faith and the love of pleasing God make possible what to natural reason is not possible. And thus in seeing the strong desire of our Most Reverend General that more monasteries be founded, it seemed to me I saw them founded. Remembering the words our Lord had spoken to me, I now perceived some beginning to what before I could not understand. I was very sad to see our Father General return to Rome. I had grown to love him very much, and it seemed to me I was left helpless. He showed me the greatest kindness, and during the times that he was free from his duties he came to speak about spiritual things as one to whom the Lord must grant great favors. In this house it was a consolation for us to hear him. Moreover, before he went away, the bishop, Don Alvaro de Mendoza, very devoted to favoring those who aim after serving God with greater perfection, asked him permission for the foundation in his diocese of some monasteries of discalced friars of the primitive rule. Other persons also asked for this. Our Father General wanted to do so, but he found disagreement within the order. And thus, so as not to disturb the province, he let the matter go for then.
5. After some days passed, I was thinking about how necessary it would be if monasteries of nuns were to be founded that there be friars observing the same rule. Seeing how few friars there were in this province, making me even wonder whether or not they were going to die out, I prayed to the Lord over the matter very much and wrote to Father General. In the letter, I begged him for this permission as best I knew how, giving him the reasons why it would be a great service to God. I pointed out how the difficulties that could arise were not sufficient to set aside so good a work, and suggested to him what service it would render to our Lady, to whom he was very devoted. She must have been the one who arranged it. This letter reached him while he was in Valencia, and from there he sent me the permission for the foundation of two monasteries because he desired the best religious observance for the order. So that there wouldn't be any opposition, he made his permission subject to the approval, difficult to obtain, of both the present and the former provincial. But since I saw that the main thing was accomplished, I had special hope the Lord would do the rest. And so it happened that through the kindness of the bishop, who took up this matter as his own, both provincials gave their permission.
6. Well then, being consoled in having the permissions, my concern grew in that there was no friar in the province that I knew of who could begin this work, nor any layman who desired to make such a start. I didn't do anything but beg our Lord that he would awaken at least one person. Neither did I have a house or the means to get one. Here I was, a poor discalced nun, without help from anywhere -- only from the Lord -- weighed down with patent letters and good desires, and without there being any possibility of my getting the work started. Neither courage nor hope failed, for since the Lord had given the one thing, He would give the other. Everything now seemed very possible, and so I set to work.
7. O greatness of God! How You manifest Your power in giving courage to an ant! How true, my Lord, that it is not because of You that those who love You fail to do great works but because of our own cowardice and pusillanimity. Since we are never determined, but full of human prudence and a thousand fears, You, consequently, my God, do not do your marvelous and great works. Who is more fond than You of giving, or of serving even at a cost to Yourself, when there is someone open to receive? May it please Your Majesty that I render You some service and that I not have to render an accounting for all that I have received, amen.
