CHAPTER 3
 
The circumstances surrounding the foundation of the monastery of St. Joseph in Medina del Campo.
 
1. While I was having all these concerns, the thought came to me to ask help from the Fathers of the Society, for they were well accepted in that place, that is, in Medina. As I have written in my account of the first foundation, they guided my soul for many years. I always feel especially devoted to them because of the great good they did for it. I wrote to the rector in Medina about what our Father General had ordered me to do. The rector happened to be the one who had been my confessor for many years, whom I mentioned, although I did not give his name. His name is Baltasar Alvarez, and at present he is provincial. He and the others said they would do what they could about the matter. They thus did a great deal to secure permission from the people and the bishop, for since the monastery is to be founded in poverty, permission is everywhere difficult to obtain. So there was a delay of several days in the negotiations.
2. A priest went there to attend to these negotiations. He was a good servant of God, very detached from all worldly things and much dedicated to prayer. He was the chaplain in the monastery where I lived. The Lord gave him the same desires that He gave me, and so I was helped very much by him, as will be seen further on. His name is Julián de Avila.
Well, now that I had the permission, I didn't have a house or a penny to buy one with. Furthermore, how could a poor wanderer like myself get credit for a loan unless the Lord would give it? The Lord provided that a very virtuous young lady, who because of lack of room could not enter St. Joseph's, heard that another house was being founded and came to ask if I would accept her in the new one. She had some money which was very little and not enough to buy a house but enough to rent one and to help with the travel expenses. And so we found one to rent. Without any more support than this and with our Father Chaplain, Julián de Avila, we left Avila. Besides myself, there were two nuns from St. Joseph's and four from the Incarnation, the monastery of the mitigated rule where I stayed before St. Joseph's was founded.
3. When our intention became known in the city, there was much criticism. Some were saying I was crazy; others were hoping for an end to that nonsense. To the bishop -- according to what he told me later -- the idea seemed very foolish. But he didn't then let me know this; neither did he hinder me, for he loved me much and didn't want to hurt me. My friends said a great deal against the project. But I didn't pay much attention to them. For that which to them seemed doubtful, to me seemed so easy that I couldn't persuade myself that it would fail to be a true success.
Before we left Avila, I wrote to a Father of our order, Fray Antonio de Heredia, asking him to buy me a house, for he was then prior at St. Anne's, the monastery of friars of our order in Medina. He spoke of the matter to a lady who was devoted to him, for she had a house that had completely collapsed except for one room. The house was situated in a fine location. She was so good she promised to sell the house and so they came to an agreement without her asking for any surety or binding force other than his word. If she had asked for any, we would have had no resources. The Lord was arranging everything. This house was so tumble-down that we had rented another to live in while it was being repaired, for there was much to do on it.
4. Well, on the first day, as nightfall was approaching and we were entering Arévalo and tired because of our bad provisions for traveling, a priest friend of ours who had lodging for us in the home of some devout women came to out to meet us. He told me in secret that we didn't have a house because the one rented was near a monastery of Augustinian friars who resisted our coming and that a lawsuit would be unavoidable. Oh, God help me! When You, Lord, want to give courage, how little do all contradictions matter! Rather, it seems I am encouraged by them, thinking that since the devil is beginning to be disturbed the Lord will be served in that monastery. Nonetheless, I told the priest to be quiet about it so as not to disturb my companions; especially two of them from the Incarnation, for the others would suffer any trial for me. One of these two was then subprioress there, and the two did much to impede the departure. They were both from good families and were coming against their will because what we were doing seemed absurd to everyone. Afterward I saw that they were more than right. For when the Lord is pleased that I found one of these houses, it seems that until after the foundation is made my mind doesn't admit any reason that would seem sufficient to set the work aside. After the deed is done, all the difficulties come before me together, as will be seen later.
5. When we reached our lodging place, I learned that in the town was a Dominican friar, a very great servant of God, to whom I had confessed during the time that I was in St. Joseph's. Because in writing of that foundation I spoke much about his virtue, I will mention here no more than his name. Fray Maestro Domingo Báñez. He is very learned and discreet. By his opinion I was guided, and in his opinion the foundation was not as troublesome as it seemed to others. The person who knows God better does God's work more easily. And from some of the favors that he knew His Majesty granted me and from what he had seen in the foundation of St. Joseph's, everything seemed to him to be very possible. It was a great consolation to me when I saw him, for with his favorable opinion it seemed to me everything would turn out all right. Well, when he came to see me, I told him in strict secrecy of my plan. To him it seemed that we could bring the matter with the Augustinians to a quick conclusion. But any delay was hard for me to bear because I didn't know what to do with so many nuns. And thus, because inside the lodging place the nuns had been told of the situation, we all passed the night with much apprehension.
6. The first thing in the morning the prior of our order, Fray Antonio, arrived and said that the house he had made an agreement to buy was adequate and had an entrance way which if adorned with some hangings could be made into a little church. We decided to move into that house. At least to me the idea seemed very good, for whatever could be done more quickly is what suited us best since we were outside our monasteries. And also I feared some opposition, since I learned through experience from the first foundation. Thus I desired that we take possession of the house before our intentions be made known, and so we determined to do this at once. Our Father Master Fray Domingo, agreed.
7. We arrived in Medina del Campo on the eve of our Lady's feast in August at twelve midnight. We dismounted at the monastery of St. Anne's so as not to make noise and proceeded to the house on foot. It was by the great mercy of God that we were not struck by any of the bulls being corralled at that hour for the next day's run. We were so engrossed in what we were doing that we didn't pay any attention. However, the Lord, who always takes care of those who seek to serve Him (and indeed, that's what we were trying to do), kept us from being harmed.
8. When we arrived at the house, we entered the courtyard. The walls looked to me to be quite dilapidated, but not as dilapidated as they looked when daylight came. It seems the Lord wanted that blessed Father to be blinded and thus unable to see that the place was not suitable for the Blessed Sacrament. When we saw the entrance way, it was necessary to clear away the dirt since overhead was nothing but a rustic roof of bare tile. Because the walls were not plastered, the night almost over, and all we had were some blankets -- I believe there were three -- which for the whole length of the entrance way were nothing, I didn't know what to do. For I saw that the place wasn't suitable for an altar. It pleased the Lord, who wanted the place to be prepared immediately, that the butler of that lady who was the owner had at her house many tapestries belonging to her and a blue damask bed-hanging; and the lady had told him to give us whatever we wanted, for she was very good.
9. When I saw such nice furnishings, I praised the Lord, and so did the others -- although we didn't know what to do for nails, nor was it the hour for buying them. We began to look in the walls. Finally, through much effort, a supply was found. With some of the men hanging the tapestries, and we cleaning the floor, we worked so quickly that when dawn came the altar was set up, and the little bell placed in a corridor; and immediately Mass was said. Having Mass was sufficient in order to take possession. But not knowing this, we reserved the Blessed Sacrament, and through some cracks in the door that was in front of us, we attended the Mass, for there was no place else for us to do so.
10. Up to this point I was very happy because for me it is the greatest consolation to see one church more where the Blessed Sacrament is preserved. But my happiness did not last long. For when Mass was finished I went to look a little bit through a window at the courtyard, and I saw that all the walls in some places had fallen to the ground and that many days would be required to repair them. Oh, God help me! When I saw His Majesty placed in the street, at a time so dangerous, on account of those Lutherans, as this time in which we now live, what anguish came to my heart!
11. To this anguish were joined all the difficulties that those who had strongly criticized the project could bring up. I understood clearly that those persons were right. It seemed impossible for me to go ahead with what had been begun. Just as previously everything seemed easy to me when I reflected that I was doing it for God, so now my temptation constricted the Lord's power to such an extent that it didn't seem I had received any favor from Him. Only my lowliness and my powerlessness did I have before me. Well now, supported by something so miserable, what success could I hope for? Had I been alone, I think I could have suffered the situation. But to think that my companions, after the opposition with which they had left, had to return to their houses was a painful thing to bear. Also, it seemed to me that since this first attempt had gone wrong, everything that I had understood I must do for the Lord in the future would not come about. Then, in addition, came the fear concerning whether or not what I understood in prayer was an illusion. This latter was not the least suffering but the greatest, for I had the strongest fear of being deceived by the devil.
O my God, what a thing it is to see a soul when You desire to abandon it to suffering! Indeed, when I recall this affliction and some others that I have had in the course of making these foundations, it doesn't seem to me that bodily trials, even though great, are anything in comparison.
12. With all this anguish that kept me truly depressed, I didn't let my companions know anything because I didn't want to cause them more distress than they already had. I suffered with this trial until evening, for then the rector of the Society sent a Father to see me who greatly encouraged and comforted me. I didn't tell him all my sufferings but only those which I felt at seeing us on the street. I began to speak of his finding us a house to rent, cost what it would cost, so that we could move to another one while this one was being repaired. And I began to console myself in seeing the many people who came, and that none of them had any thought that what we did was foolish, which was mercy from God, for it would have been very right if the Blessed Sacrament had been taken away from us. Now I think back on my foolishness and how no one thought of consuming the Eucharist, though it seemed to me that if it had been consumed, everything would have been undone.
13. Despite our great efforts, no house for rent was found in the whole area. This made me suffer through very painful nights and days. Even though I put some men in charge of always keeping watch over the Blessed Sacrament, I was worried that they might fall asleep. So I rose during the night to watch it through a window, for the moon was very bright and I could easily see it. Many people came during all those days, and not only did they fail to perceive this as wrong but they were stirred to devotion to see our Lord once again in the stable. And His Majesty, as one who never tires of humiliating Himself for us, didn't seem to want to leave it.
14. After eight days had passed, a merchant who lived in a very nice house, told us when he saw our need that we could live on the upper floor of his house and stay there as though in our own. It had a large gilded room that he gave us for a church. And a lady who lived next to the house that we bought, whose name was Doña Elena de Quiroga, a great servant of God, told me she would help so that construction of a chapel for the Blessed Sacrament could be immediately started, and also accommodations made so that we could observe the rule of enclosure. Others gave us many alms for food, but this lady was the one who aided me most.
15. Now with this I began to calm down because we were able to keep strict enclosure, and we began to recite the Hours. The good prior hurried very much with the repair of the house, and he suffered many trials. Nonetheless, the work took two months. But the house was repaired in such a way that we were able to live there in a reasonably good manner for several years. Afterward, our Lord continued bringing about improvements for it.
16. While in Medina, I was still concerned about the monasteries for friars, and since I didn't have any, as I said, I didn't know what to do. So I decided to speak about the matter very confidentially with the prior there to see what he would counsel me, and this I did. He was happy to know of it and promised me he would be the first. I took it that he was joking with me and told him so. For although he was always a good friar, recollected, very studious, and fond of his cell -- in fact, he was a learned man -- it didn't seem to me he was the one for a beginning like this. Neither would he have the courage or promote the austerity that was necessary, since he was fragile and not given to austerity. He assured me very much and asserted that for many days the Lord had been calling him to a stricter life. Thus he had already decided to go to the Carthusians, and they had already told him they would accept him. Despite all this, I was not completely satisfied. Although I was happy to hear what he said, I asked that we put it off for a while and that he prepare by putting into practice the things he would be promising. And this he did, for a year passed and during that year so many trials and persecutions from many false accusations came upon him that it seems the Lord wanted to test him. He bore it all so well and was making such progress that I praised our Lord, and it seemed to me His Majesty was preparing him for the new foundation.
17. A little later it happened that a young Father came there who was studying at Salamanca. He came along with another, as his companion, who told me great things about the life this Father was leading. The young Father's name was Fray John of the Cross. I praised our Lord. And when I spoke with this young friar, he pleased me very much. I learned from him how he also wanted to go to the Carthusians. Telling him what I was attempting to do, I begged him to wait until the Lord would give us a monastery and pointed out the great good that would be accomplished if in his desire to improve he were to remain in his own order and that much greater service would be rendered to the Lord. He promised me he would remain as long as he wouldn't have to wait long. When I saw that I already had two friars to begin with, it seemed to me the matter was taken care of; although I still wasn't so satisfied with the prior, and thus I waited a while, and waited also for the sake of finding a place where they could begin.
18. The nuns were gaining esteem in the town and receiving much affection. In my opinion, rightly so, for they were not interested in anything else than how each one could serve our Lord more. In all matter they lived the same way as at St. Joseph's in Avila since the rule and constitutions were the same.
The Lord began to call some women to receive the habit, and the favors He gave them were so great that I was amazed. May He be ever blessed, amen. In order to love, it doesn't seem that He waits for anything else than to be loved.

CHAPTER 4
 
Treats of some favors the Lord grants to the nuns of these monasteries and gives counsel to the prioresses about the attitude one should have toward these nuns.
 
1. Since I do no know how much time on this earth the Lord will still give me, or how much opportunity to write, and since now it seems I have a little time, I thought that before I go further I should give some counsels to prioresses. Through these, the prioresses will learn both to understand themselves and to guide their subjects so that the souls of these latter will receive greater benefit, even though with less satisfaction.
It should be noted that, when they ordered me to write about these foundations, seven monasteries (leaving aside the first one, St. Joseph's in Avila, of which I wrote at that time) had been founded by the Lord's favor. This takes us up to the foundation of Alba de Tormes, which is the last of them. The reason that more have not been established is that my superiors have tied me down to something else, as will be seen later.
2. Well, in observing what has been happening spiritually during these years in these monasteries, I have seen the need for what I want to say. May it please our Lord that I may manage to do so in accordance with what I see is necessary. If the spiritual experiences are not counterfeit, it's necessary that souls not be frightened. For as I have mentioned in other places, in some little things I've written for the Sisters, if we proceed with a pure conscience and obediently, the Lord will never permit the devil to have enough influence to deceive harmfully our souls; on the contrary, the devil himself is the one who is left deceived. And since he knows this, I don't believe he does as much harm as our imagination and bad humors do, especially if there is melancholy; for the nature of women is weak, and the self-love that reigns in us is very subtle. Thus many persons have come to me, both men and women, together with the nuns of these houses, who I have clearly discerned were often deceiving themselves without wanting to do so. I really believe that the devil must be meddling so as to trick us. But I have seen very many, as I say, whom the Lord in His goodness has not let out of His hand. Perhaps He wants to exercise them through these deceptions they undergo so that they might gain experience.
3. Things pertaining to prayer and perfection are, because of our own sins, so discredited in the world that it's necessary for me to explain myself the way I do. If even without seeing danger people fear to walk this path of prayer, what would happen if we mentioned some of the danger? Although, truthfully, there is danger in everything, and, while we live, we have to proceed with fear and ask the Lord to teach us and not abandon us. But, as I believe I once said, if some danger can be lacking, there is much less of it for those who turn their thoughts more to God and strive for perfection in their lives.
4. Since, my Lord, we see that You often free us from the dangers in which we place ourselves, even in opposition to You, how can one believe that You will fail to free us when we aim after nothing more than to please You and delight in You? Never can I believe this! It could be that because of other secret judgments God might permit some things that must happen anyway. But good never brought about evil. Thus, may what I have said help us strive to walk better along the road so as to please our Spouse more and find Him sooner, but not make us abandon it; and encourage us to walk with fortitude along a road that has such rugged mountain passes, as does that of this life, but not intimidate us from walking through them. For, in the final analysis, by proceeding with humility, through the mercy of God, we will reach that city of Jerusalem, where all that has been suffered will be little, or nothing, in comparison with what is enjoyed.
5. Well, as these little dovecotes of the Virgin, our Lady, were beginning to be inhabited, the divine Majesty began to show His greatness in these weak little women, who were strong though in their desires and their detachment from every creature. When practiced with a pure conscience, such detachment must be what most joins the soul to God. There is no need to point this out because if the detachment is true it seems to me impossible that one offend the Lord. Since in all their dealings and conversations these nuns are concerned with Him. His Majesty doesn't seem to want to leave them. This is what I see now and in truth can say. Let those fear who are to come and who will read this. And if they do not see what is now seen, let them not blame the times, for it is always a suitable time for God to grant great favors to the one who truly serves Him. And let them strive to discern whether there is some failure in this detachment and correct it.
6. I sometimes hear it said about the first members of religious orders that since they were the foundation the Lord granted them greater favors as He did to our holy forebears; and this is true. But we must always observe that they are the foundation for those who are to come. If we who live now had not fallen from where our forebears were, and those who come after us would live as they did, the edifice would always be firm. What does it profit me that our forebears had been so holy if I afterward am so wretched that I leave the edifice damaged through bad customs? For it is clear that those who come will not so much remember those who lived many years ago as those they see before them. It would be rather amusing were I to make the excuse that I am not one of the first members and at the same time fail to recognize the difference lying between my life and virtue and that of those to whom God granted such great favors.
7. Oh, God help me! What twisted excuses and what obvious deceit! I regret, my God, to be so wretched and so useless in your service; but I know well that the fault lies within me that You do not grant me the favors You did to my forebears. I grieve over my life, Lord, when I compare it with theirs, and I cannot say this without tears. I see that I have lost what they have worked for and that I can in no way blame You. Nor is it in any way good for persons to complain if they see their order in some decline; rather, they should strive to be the kind of rock on which the edifice may again be raised, for the Lord will help toward that.
8. Well to return to what I was saying, for I have digressed a great deal, the favors the Lord grants in these houses are so many that if there are one or two in each that God leads now by meditation all the rest reach perfect contemplation. Some are so advanced that they attain to rapture. To others the Lord grants a favor of another kind, giving them, along with rapture, revelations and visions that one clearly understands to be from God. There is no house now that does not have one, two, or three who receive this latter favor. Well do I understand that sanctity does not lie in these favors, nor is it my intention to praise only them but to make it understood that the counsels I want to give have a purpose.

CHAPTER 5
 
Gives some counsels on matters concerning prayer. This chapter is very beneficial for those engaged in active works.
 
1. It is not my intention or thought that what I say here be taken for certain and as an infallible rule, for that would be foolish in things so difficult. Since there are many paths along this way of the spirit, it could be that I will manage to say certain useful things about some of them. If those who do not walk along the path of which I'm speaking do not understand what I'm saying, it will be because they are walking by another. And if I do not help anyone, the Lord will accept my desire. He knows that even though I have not experienced all of which I speak, I have seen it in other souls.
2. First, I want to treat, according to my poor understanding, of the substance of perfect prayer. For I have run into some for whom it seems the whole business lies in thinking. If they can keep their minds much occupied in God, even though great effort is exerted, they at once think they are spiritual. If, on the contrary, without being able to avoid it, they become distracted, even if for the sake of good things, they then become disconsolate and think they are lost. Learned men will not fall victim to these misconceptions, although I have already met learned men who have had some of them. But it is fitting that we women receive advice with regard to all these misunderstandings. I do not deny that it is a favor from the Lord if someone is able to be always meditating on His works, and it is good that one strive to do so. However, it must be understood that not all imaginations are by their nature capable of this meditating, but all souls are capable of loving. I have already at another time written about the causes of this restlessness of our imagination, I think; not all the causes -- that would be impossible -- but some. And so I am not treating of this now. But I should like to explain that the soul is not the mind, nor is the will directed by thinking, for this would be very unfortunate. Hence, the soul's progress does not lie in thinking much but in loving much.
3. How does one acquire this love? By being determined to work and to suffer, and to do so when the occasion arises. It is indeed true that by thinking of what we owe the Lord, of who He is, and what we are, a soul's determination grows, and that this thinking is very meritorious and appropriate for beginners. But it must be understood that this is true provided that nothing interferes with obedience or benefit to one's neighbor. When either of these two things presents itself, time is demanded, and also the abandonment of what we so much desire to give God, which, in our opinion, is to be alone thinking of Him and delighting in the delights that He give us. To leave aside these delights for either of these other two things is to give delight to Him and do the work for Him, as He Himself said: What you did for one of these little ones you did for Me. And in matters touching on obedience He doesn't want the soul who truly loves Him to take any other path than the one He did: obediens usque ad mortem.
4. Well if this is true, from where does the displeasure proceed which for the greater part is felt when one has not spent a large part of the day very much withdrawn and absorbed in God, even though we are occupied with these other things? In my opinion, there are two reasons for this displeasure: The first and main one is the very subtle self-love that is mixed in here. This self-love does not allow one to understand what it is to want to please ourselves rather than God. For, clearly, after a soul begins to taste how sweet the Lord is, it is more pleasing for the body to be resting without work and for the soul to be receiving delight.
5. O charity of those who truly love this Lord and know their own nature! How little rest they can have if they see they may play a little part in getting even one soul to make progress and to love God more, or in consoling it, or in taking away some danger from it. How poorly would it then rest with this particular rest of its own! And when it cannot help with deeds, it will do so with prayer, begging the Lord for the many souls that it is sad to see being lost. The soul loses its delight and counts the loss as gain, for it doesn't think about its own satisfaction but rather about how it can best do the Lord's will, and this it does through obedience. It would be a distressing thing if God were clearly telling us to go after something that matters to Him and we would not want to do so but want to remain looking at Him because that is more pleasing to us. What an amusing kind of progress in the love of God it is, to tie His hands by thinking that He cannot help us except by one path!
6. I know personally some individuals (leaving aside, as I have said, what I have experienced) who brought me to understand this truth when I was greatly distressed to see myself with so little time. And I thus was sorry for them to see they were so occupied with so many business matters and things that obedience commanded them. I was thinking to myself, and even said so, that it wasn't possible in the midst of such commotion for the spirit to grow, for at that time they didn't have much spirit. O Lord, how different are your paths from our clumsy imaginings! And how from a soul that is already determined to love You and is abandoned into Your hands, You do not want anything but that it obey, that it inquire well into what is for Your greater service, and that it desire this! There's no need for it to be seeking out paths or choosing them, for its will is Yours. You, my Lord, take up this care of guiding it to where it receives the most benefit. The prelate who is the superior may not be concerned for what benefits the soul but concerned only that the business he thinks is fitting for the community be attended to. Yet, You, my God, do have concern and go about disposing the soul and the things with which it is dealing in such a way that, without understanding how, we find in ourselves spiritual improvement, so great that we are afterward left amazed.
7. There was a person to whom I spoke a few days ago who for about fifteen years was kept so busy through obedience with work in occupations and government that in all those years he didn't remember having had one day for himself, although he tried the best he could to keep a pure conscience and have some periods each day for prayer. His soul in its inclination is one of the most obedient I have seen, and so he communicates this spirit of obedience to all those with whom he deals. The Lord has repaid him well; for he has found that he has, without knowing how, that same precious and desirable liberty of spirit that the perfect have. In it, they find all the happiness that could be wanted in this life, for in desiring nothing they possess all. Nothing on earth do they fear or desire, neither do trials disturb them, nor do consolations move them. In sum, nothing can take away their peace because these souls depend only on God. And since no one can take Him away from them, only the fear of losing Him can cause them pain. Everything else in this world, in their opinion, is as though it were not; it neither contributes anything nor removes anything from their happiness. Oh, happy obedience and happy the resulting distraction that could obtain so much!
8. This is not the only person, for I have known others of the same sort, whom I had not seen for some, or many, years. In asking them about how they had spent these years, I learned that the years were all spent in the fulfillment of the duties of obedience and charity. On the other hand, I saw such improvement in spiritual things that I was amazed. Well, come now, my daughters, don't be sad when obedience draws you to involvement in exterior matters. Know that if it is in the kitchen, the Lord walks among the pots and pans helping you both interiorly and exteriorly.
9. I remember that I met a religious who had resolved and become very determined never to say "no" to anything his superior commanded no matter how much labor it would cost him. One day he was completely worn out from work; and when it was already late and he could no longer stay on his feet and went to sit down and rest a little, the superior met him and told him to take the hoe and go dig in the garden. He remained silent; although in his human nature he was indeed afflicted, for he couldn't help it. He took his hoe and when he was about to enter a passageway into the garden (I saw the spot many years after he told me of this, for I managed to found a house in that place), our Lord appeared to him weighed down with the cross, so tired and worn that this religious understood clearly that what he himself was enduring was nothing when compared with what the Lord endured.
10. I believe that, since the devil sees there is no path that leads more quickly to the highest perfection than obedience, he sets up many annoyances and difficulties under the color of good. Note this well and you will see clearly that I am speaking the truth. The highest perfection obviously does not consist in interior delights or in great raptures or in visions or in the spirit of prophecy but in having our will so much in conformity with God's will that there is nothing we know He wills that we do not want with all our desire, and in accepting the bitter as happily as we do the delightful when we know that His Majesty desires it. This seems most difficult (not the doing of it, but this being content with what completely contradicts our nature); and indeed it truly is difficult. But love has this strength if it is perfect, for we forget about pleasing ourselves in order to please the one we love. And truly this is so; for even though the trials may be very great, they become sweet when we know we are pleasing God. And this is the way by which those who have reached this stage love persecutions, dishonor, and offenses. This is so certain, so well known, and so plain that there is no reason for me to delay over the matter.
11. What I intend to explain is why obedience, in my opinion, is the quickest or best means for reaching this most happy state. The reason is that since we are by no means lords of our own will in such a way that we can employ it purely and simply in God, obedience is the true path for subjecting it to reason. For this subjection is not accomplished by means of good reasons; human nature and self-love can find so many of them that we would never arrive at the goal. And often the most reasonable thing seems to us foolish if it is not to our advantage.
12. So much could be said here that we would never finish dealing with this interior battle and all that the devil, the world, and our own sensuality do to make us twist reason.
Well, what is the remedy? That in obedience, just as in a very dubious litigation, a judge is accepted and both sides place the matter in his hands. Tired of arguing, our soul accepts one who may be either the superior or the confessor with the determination not to have any more argument or to think any more of its own case but to trust the words of the Lord who says, Whoever hears you hears Me, and it disregards its own will. The Lord esteems this surrender very much, and rightly so, because it means making Him Lord over the free will He has given us. By exercising ourselves in this surrender, sometimes denying ourselves, at other times waging a thousand battles since the judgment made in our case seems to us absurd, we come to be conformed with what they command us. It can be painful exercise, but with or without the pain we in the end do what is commanded, and the Lord helps so much on His part that for the same reason that we subject our will and reason to Him He makes us lords over our will. Then, being lords of ourselves, we can with perfection be occupied with God, giving Him a pure will that He may join it with His, asking Him to send fire from heaven so that His love may burn this sacrifice and take away everything that could displease him. We have done what we can by placing the sacrifice on the altar, although through much hardship. And, insofar as is in our power, the sacrifice remains on the altar and does not touch the ground.
13. Clearly, no one can give what he does not have; he must have it first. Well, believe me that in order to acquire this treasure there is no better way than to dig and toil in order to excavate from this mine of obedience. The more we dig the more we shall find; and the more we submit to men, having no other will than that of our superiors, the more we shall be lords over our will so as to bring it into conformity with God's will.
Observe, Sisters, whether leaving the pleasure of solitude is not well repaid. I tell you that it is not because of a lack of solitude that you will fail to dispose yourselves to reach this true union that was mentioned, that is, to make your will one with God's. This is the union that I desire and would want for all of you, and not some absorptions, however delightful they may be, that have been given the name "union." The absorption will be genuine union if afterward there is present the union just explained. But if after this suspension not much obedience remains, and self-will is present, it seems to me the soul will be united with its self-love rather than with the will of God. May His Majesty be pleased that I act in accordance with what I understand.
14. The second reason, it seems to me, for this displeasure is that since in solitude there are fewer occasions to offend the Lord (for some cannot be lacking because the devils and we ourselves are present everywhere), it seems the soul in its journey is freer from stain. For if it is fearful of offending Him, it finds the greatest consolation in not having anything to make it stumble. And certainly this seems to me reason enough for desiring not to have conversation with anyone unless it's about God's great favors and delights.
15. Here, my daughters, is where love will be seen: not hidden in corners but in the midst of the occasions of falling. And believe me that even though there may be more faults, and even some slight losses, our gain will be incomparably greater. Note that I am always presupposing that these things are done out of obedience or charity. For if these latter are not factors, I always repeat that solitude is better, and even that we must desire it. We must desire solitude even when involved in the things I'm speaking of; indeed, this desire is continually present in souls that truly love God. As for my saying that leaving solitude is a gain, I say this because doing so makes us realize who we are and the degree of virtue we have. For people who are always recollected in solitude, however holy in their own opinion they may be, don't know whether they are patient or humble, nor do they have the means of knowing this. How could it be known whether a man were valiant if he were not seen in battle? St. Peter thought he was very courageous; see how he acted when the occasion presented itself. But he came through that experience not trusting at all in himself, and as a result he trusted in God and subsequently suffered the martyrdom about which we know.
16. Oh, God help me, if only we understood how great our misery is! In everything there is danger if we do not understand this misery. For that reason it is a great good for us if we are ordered to do things that show us our own lowliness. I consider one day of humble self-knowledge a greater favor from the Lord, even though the day may have cost us numerous afflictions and trials, than many days of prayer. Moreover, the true lover loves everywhere and is always thinking of the Beloved! It would be a thing hard to bear if we were able to pray only when off in some corner. I do realize that prayer in the midst of occupations cannot last many hours; but, O my Lord, what power over You a sigh of sorrow has that comes from the depths of our hearts on seeing that it isn't enough that we are in this exile but that we are not even given the chance to be alone enjoying You.
17. Here we see clearly that we are His slaves, our wills being sold, out of love for Him, through the virtue of obedience, since through obedience we in some way give up enjoying God Himself. And yet, this is nothing if we consider that He came from the bosom of His Father out of obedience to become our slave. Well, how can one repay this favor or what service render for it? It's necessary to be on one's guard and careful in the performance of good works by having frequent interior recourse to God, even though these works are done in obedience and charity. And let souls believe me that it is not the length of time spent in prayer that benefits one; when the time is spent as well in good works, it is a help in preparing the soul for the enkindling of love. The soul may thereby be better prepared in a very short time than through many hours of reflection. All must come from His hand. May He be blessed forever.

CHAPTER 6
 
Warns about the harm that can be done to spiritual people if they do not understand when the spirit must be resisted. Treats of the soul's desires to receive Communion and of the delusion that can be present in such desires. There are important things here for those who govern these houses.
 
1. I have diligently tried to understand the origin of a great absorption I have seen in some persons whom the Lord favors much in prayer and who do their best to prepare themselves to receive these gifts. I am not dealing now with the soul's suspension or rapture given by His Majesty, for I have written much about this in other places. In a matter like rapture there is nothing to speak of because if it is genuine we cannot do anything ourselves to prevent it, however much we try. It must be noted that in rapture the power that takes away our power to be in control of ourselves lasts but a short while. But frequently it happens that there begins a kind of prayer of quiet, something that resembles spiritual sleep, that so absorbs the soul that if we do not understand how one is to proceed therein much time could be lost and our strength diminished through our own fault and with little merit.
2. I would like to know how to explain myself here; it is so difficult that I don't know if I'll succeed. But I do know well that, if they want to believe me, souls who may be proceeding under this misconception will understand. I know some souls of great virtue who remained for seven or eight hours in absorption; everything seemed to them to be rapture. Any virtuous exercise so laid hold of them that they soon abandoned themselves to the absorption, thinking it was not good to resist the Lord. Little by little such persons can die or become fools if they do not seek a remedy. What I understand about this occurrence is that since the Lord begins to give delight, and our nature is very fond of delight, the soul becomes so occupied in the pleasure that it does not want to stir or lose that experience for anything. Indeed, the pleasure is greater than any of the world's pleasures. And when the experience takes place in a weak nature, or comes from one's own natural inventiveness (or better, imagination), nature will make souls know a thousand delightful lies. In this absorption the imagination does not wander but in apprehending one thing concentrates on it without distraction. Many persons when they begin to think about something, even though the matters may not concern God, are left absorbed or looking at it without adverting to what they are gazing on. They are like people who are slow and who seem, through indolence, to forget what they are about to say. This is what happens in these cases in conformity with the person's nature, or bodily humors, or weakness, or if the individual suffers melancholy; these people end up believing a thousand pleasant lies.
3. A little further on I shall speak of melancholy, but even if this humor is not present, that which I have mentioned happens. And it also happens to persons who are worn out through penance. As I have said, when love begins to give pleasure to the senses these persons allow themselves to be carried away by it. In my opinion their love would be much better if they did not allow themselves to remain in stupefaction, for in this condition of prayer one can easily resist. For just as a person will faint from weakness and be unable to speak or stir, so this is what happens here; for the strength of the spirit lays hold of nature, when this latter is weak, and subjects it.
4. You could ask me what difference there is between this absorption and rapture since the two are the same, at least in appearance -- and you would be right as regards appearance but not as regards reality. For in rapture, or union of all the faculties, as I say, the duration is short, and great effects, interior light, and many other benefits are given, and the intellect doesn't work; it is the Lord who works in the will. In the absorption, things are very different, for although the body is captive, the will is not, nor is the memory or the intellect. But these faculties carry on their delirious activity, and if they rest in something they will perhaps go back and forth over it with ifs and buts.
5. I find no benefit in this bodily weakness -- for it is nothing else -- except that it arises from a good source. It would be a greater help to use this time well than to remain in this absorption so long. Much more can be merited by making an act of love and by often awakening the will to greater love of God than by leaving it listless. So I counsel the prioresses to make every possible effort to prevent the nuns from spending long periods in this daze. For to remain in such an absorption is nothing else, in my opinion, than to allow the faculties and senses to become crippled and not carry out what the soul commands them. Thus they deprive the soul of the gain that they usually get for it by proceeding carefully. If the absorption is understood to be caused by weakness, take away the fasts and disciplines (I mean those that are not obligatory, and in time it could happen that all of them in good conscience may be taken away), and give these persons duties that will distract them.
6. And even if one does not experience these swoons, this course of action is necessary if the imagination is greatly occupied, even if with very sublime things of prayer. For it happens sometimes that these persons are not in control of themselves. If they have received some extraordinary favor form the Lord or seen some vision, then, especially, will their souls be left in such a condition that they will think they are continuing to see the vision; but this is not so, for the vision was seen no more than once. Whoever finds herself in this absorption for many days should strive to change the subject she is meditating on, for if a subject pertains to the things of God there is no difficulty in dwelling on one more than another since the faculties will be occupied in God. And sometimes one rejoices as much in considering God's creatures and the power He had in creating them as in thinking of the Creator Himself.
7. O hapless human misery that was left in this condition through sin, for even in good things we need rule and measure so as not to ruin our health and become incapable of enjoying them. And indeed what was said is fitting for many persons, especially those with weak heads or imaginations. If one follows this advice one serves our Lord more, and it is very necessary that what I said be understood. If a nun sees that one of the mysteries of the Passion or of the glory of heaven or of any other similar thing comes into her imagination and remains many days and that, although she wants to, she cannot think of something else or take away this absorption, let her understand that it is fitting for her to distract herself insofar as she can. Otherwise, she will in time come to know the harm that will be done and that this absorption stems from what I mentioned: either from great bodily weakness or from the imagination, which is worse. A madman, when he goes into some frenzy, is not the master of himself, cannot divert his attention, or think of anything else, nor are there reasons that can move him to do this because he is not in control of his reasoning power. The same thing could happen here; even though the absorption is a delightful madness -- or if she has the humor of melancholy -- it can do her very great harm. I don't see how it could be good, for the soul is capable of enjoying God Himself. Well, even if the subject matter is not one of the mysteries that I mentioned, since God is infinite, why must the soul be held captive by just one of His mysteries or grandeurs, for there is so much in which we can be occupied? And the more of His mysteries we might want to consider the more His grandeurs will be revealed.
8. I do not mean that in the course of an hour or a day they should think on many things, for this would perhaps amount to enjoying none of them properly. Since these matters are so delicate, I would not want others to think I'm saying what it doesn't enter my mind to say, or to understand one thing for another. Certainly, it is so important to understand this chapter well that even though writing about such a matter may be a tiresome thing to do, it doesn't tire me. Nor would I want whoever does not at first understand this to grow tired in reading it many times, especially the prioresses and the mistresses of novices who must guide the Sisters in prayer. For the Sisters will see that if they do not walk carefully in the beginning, much time will be required afterward to remedy similar weaknesses.
9. If I were to write all that has come to my attention concerning this harm, they would see that I am right to insist so much on the matter. I want to mention only one instance, and from this one they will be able to deduce everything else. There are in one of these monasteries two Sisters, one a choir nun and the other a lay Sister, both of whom are most prayerful, mortified, humble and virtuous, much favored by the Lord, to whom He communicates His great marvels. They are especially so detached and taken up with His love that it doesn't seem, however much we desire to catch up with them, that they fail to respond, in conformity with our lowliness, to the favors our Lord grants them. I have dwelt so much on their virtues in order that those who do not have so much virtue will fear more. When they began to experience some great impulses of desire for the Lord that they could not resist, it seemed to them the desire was mitigated when they received Communion. As a result, they obtained from their confessors permission to receive frequently. Their affliction increased so much that if they did not receive Communion each day, it seemed to them they would die. The confessors, since they saw souls like these with such great desires, thought daily Communion was a suitable remedy for the complaint; and the one confessor was a very spiritual man.
10. The matter didn't stop here. In the case of one of the nuns, her longings were so great that she found it necessary to receive Communion early in the morning so as to be able to live; that was her opinion, for the two were not souls that would feign anything, nor for anything in the world would they tell a lie. I was not there, but the prioress wrote to me of what was going on, saying that she could not get anywhere with them and that competent persons held that since nothing else could be done this remedy should be used. I at once, by the grace of God, understood the situation. Nonetheless, I remained silent until I could be present there, for I feared lest I be mistaken; and it would not have been right to contradict the one who approved, until giving him my reasons.
11. He was so humble that as soon as I went there and spoke to him he agreed with me. The other one was not so spiritual, hardly at all in comparison. There was no argument that could persuade him. But I cared little about persuading this one because I was not so obliged to him. I began to speak to the nuns and give many reasons in my opinion sufficient to make them understand that it was their imagination that made them think they would die without this remedy. They had their minds so fixed on receiving Communion as a remedy that nothing sufficed, nor was it enough to bring forth reasons. Now I saw that they were to be excused, and I told them that I too had such desires and would give up receiving Communion so that they could believe that they wouldn't have to receive except when everyone did. I told them we would all three die, for I thought doing so would be better than to start a custom like this in these houses where there were others who loved God as much as they and would want to do likewise.
12. The harm the custom had caused was so extreme -- and the devil must have meddled -- that since they did not receive Communion, they truly thought they would die. I showed great severity, because the more I saw that they were not submitting themselves to obedience (because in their opinion they could not do so) the more clearly I saw that the desire was a temptation. They passed through that day with a good deal of difficulty; and another day, with a little less. And so the impulsion continued to diminish in such a way that even if I received Communion, because I was ordered to do so (for the confessor saw them so weak that he didn't give them the same order), they bore this very well.
13. Within a short time both they and everyone else recognized that this had been a temptation. And they realized how good it had been to remedy the situation in time, for a little later more things happened in that house that were disturbing to the superiors (not through the fault of these two nuns -- perhaps later I may say something about it); and these superiors would not, in addition, have taken well to a custom like that, nor would they have tolerated it.
14. Oh, how many things of this sort I could mention. I'll mention only one other. It didn't happen in a monastery of ours but in a monastery of Bernardines. There was a nun there who was no less virtuous than those mentioned. Through disciplines and fasts she became so weak that each time she received Communion or had occasion to be enkindled in devotion she would immediately fall to the floor and there remain for eight or nine hours. It seemed to her and everyone else that she was experiencing a rapture. This happened so often that if a remedy had not been provided, much harm would have resulted. The report of the raptures spread through the whole locality. It saddened me to hear about her experience because, thanks be to the Lord, I understood its nature, and I feared about where it would end up. Her confessor was a close friend of mine, and he came to tell me about it. I told him what I understood and why the absorption was a waste of time and couldn't possibly be a rapture, but the result of weakness. I told him to take away her fasts and disciplines and to distract her. She was obedient; she did as he said. As soon as she began to gain strength there was no more thought of rapture. And if indeed the experience had been one of rapture nothing would have sufficed to prevent it except the will of God, for the force of the spirit is so great that our efforts are not sufficient to resist. And, as I said, a rapture leaves great effect in the soul; this other leaves no more effects than if it had not occurred, but tiredness in the body.
15. Let it, therefore, be understood from this example that anything that so controls us that we know our reason is not free should be held as suspect. Know that liberty of spirit will never be gained in this way. For one of the traits reason has is that it can find God in all things and be able to think about them. All the rest is subjection of spirit and, apart from the harm done to the body, so binds the soul as to hinder growth. The soul here resembles someone on a journey who enters a quagmire or swamp and thus cannot move onward. And, in order to advance, a soul must not only walk but fly. This immobility happens frequently when, as they say (and it seems to them), they are immersed in the divinity and cannot help themselves or find a remedy by diverting their attention because they are suspended.
16. Let them note that I again advise that in an instance of one day or four or eight there is nothing to fear, for it is not unusual for someone naturally weak to remain stunned for a number of days. If the matter goes beyond this, a remedy is necessary. The good in all this is that there is no sinful fault, nor will these souls fail to gain merit. But there are the difficulties I mentioned and many more. In the matter concerning Communion, it will be a very great difficulty, because of the soul's love, if there is no submission in these things to the confessor and the prioress. Even though the soul feels drawn to solitude, it shouldn't go to the extreme of not consulting with them. It's necessary in this just as in other things that souls mortify themselves and be brought to understand that refraining from doing one's own will is more fitting than the experience of consolation.
17. Our self-love, too, can get mixed in with these experiences. It has happened to me sometimes that when I saw others receiving Communion just after I had received myself (to the point that the sacred species must have been still intact), I would desire not to have received so as to receive again. Since this happened to me so many times, I came afterward to notice (for at the time it didn't seem to me there was anything to give careful attention to) how the desire came more from wanting my own satisfaction than from love of God. Since in receiving Communion we, for the most part, experience tenderness and delight, that desire to receive again was taking hold of me. If its purpose was to have God within my soul, I already had Him; if it was to fulfill the obligation of going to Holy Communion, I had already done so; if to receive the favors that are bestowed with the Blessed Sacrament, I had already received them. Finally, I came to understand clearly that there was no other purpose in the desire than to experience again that sensible delight.
18. I remember that in a place where we had one of our monasteries I knew a woman who was a very great servant of God in the opinion of the whole town, and she must have been. She received Communion daily and did not have a particular confessor; but on one day she would go to one church to receive Communion, and on another day to another. I noted this and wished more that she obey someone than receive Communion so often. She was in a house by herself and, in my opinion, doing whatever she wanted. But since she was good, all that she did was considered good. I told her of this at times, but she didn't pay any attention to me, and with reason, for she was much better than I. But in this matter I didn't think I was mistaken. The holy Fray Peter of Alcántara came to that place, and I arranged that he talk to her. I did not rest satisfied with the account she gave him. But perhaps she had nothing more to tell, for we are so miserable that we are never much satisfied except with those who follow our own way; for I believe that she had served the Lord more and done more penance in one year than I had in many.
19. But to come to the point, she fell sick with a fatal illness and diligently arranged that Mass be said in her house each day and that she receive the Blessed Sacrament. Since the sickness continued, a priest, a good servant of God, who often said the Mass for her, didn't think it was proper that she receive Communion daily in her house. The devil must have tempted her, because that day happened to be her last, the day on which she died. Since she saw the Mass ending and that she was deprived of the Lord, she became so greatly vexed and angry with the priest that he came to me, much scandalized, to tell me about it. I felt very sorry, for I still don't know if she was reconciled; it seems to me she died soon afterward.
20. Hence I came to understand the harm done by following our own will in no matter what; and especially in so important a matter. For it is right that those who approach the Lord with such frequency should so understand their own unworthiness as to refuse to follow their own opinion, but supply, by obedience to a command, that which is lacking in order to approach so great a Lord -- and what is lacking must be great. This good soul had the opportunity to humble herself very much, and perhaps she would have thereby merited more than by receiving Communion. It should be understood that the priest was not at fault, but that the Lord, seeing her misery and how unworthy she was, had thus ordained in order to enter so wretched a lodging. This is what a certain person did whom discreet confessors often refused to allow to receive Communion, for she went frequently. This person, though she felt the loss very deeply, desired, on the other hand, the honor of God more than her own and did nothing but praise Him because He had awakened the confessor to look after her and not let His Majesty enter so wretched a lodging. And with these reflections she obeyed, with deep calm in her soul, although with a tender and loving pain. But not for the whole world together would she have gone against what was commanded her.
21. Believe me, it is clear that a love of God (I do not mean that it is really love but that in our opinion it is) that so stirs the passions that one ends up offending the Lord, or so alters the peace of the enamored soul that no attention is paid to reason, is in fact self-seeking. And the devil will be on the alert to afflict us when he thinks he can do us more harm, as he did to this woman. For certainly it frightened me very much, although not because I believed it would play a part in hindering her salvation, for the goodness of God is great, but because the temptation came at the worst time.
22. I have mentioned the matter here so that the prioresses might be warned and the Sisters might fear, reflect, and examine themselves on the manner in which they approach to receive so great a favor. If they approach in order to please God, they already know that He is pleased more by obedience than by sacrifice. Well, if this is true and if I merit more, why am I disturbed? I do not say they are left without a humble distress, for not all souls have reached such perfection that they will be freed from suffering distress merely by the fact that they know they are doing what is more pleasing to God. Clearly, if the will is very detached from all self-interest, it will not feel anything. Rather it will rejoice that it is offered an occasion to please the Lord in something so costly, and it will humble itself and be just as satisfied by making a spiritual communion.
23. In the beginning of the spiritual life these great desires to approach the Lord are favors granted by God. This is true also at the end, but I say the beginning because at that time they should be more appreciated. Since in other things pertaining to perfection that I mentioned these beginners are not so advanced, it may be readily granted them that they experience tenderness and feel pain when Communion is taken from them, provided the pain is borne with peace of soul and they draw forth acts of humility as a result. But when these souls experience some disturbance or passion and become angry with the prioress or confessors, they should believe that their desire to receive is an obvious temptation. This also holds true if someone decides to receive Communion even though the confessor says not to receive. I would not want the merit that is thereby derived, for in such matters we must not be the judges of our own case. He who has the keys to bind and loose must be the one to judge. That we might have understanding in things so important, may it please the Lord go give us light; and may His help not fail lest we cause Him displeasure through the favors He grants us.
