CHAPTER 7
 
How one must deal with the nuns who have melancholy. This chapter is necessary for prioresses.
 
1. These Sisters of mine at St. Joseph's in Salamanca, where I am staying while writing this, have repeatedly asked me to say something about how one must deal with the nuns who have that bodily humor called melancholy. For however much we strive not to accept those who have it, it is subtle and feigns death when it needs to, and thus we do not recognize it until the matter cannot be remedied. It seems to me that in a little book I said something about this; I don't remember. Little is lost in saying something here, if the Lord be pleased that I succeed in doing so. It could be that I said something about this already, at another time. I would mention it another hundred times if I thought I could say something pertinent about the matter. So many are the contrivances that this humor seeks in order to do its own will that there is a need to search them out in order to know how to bear with those who have it and govern them so that no harm is done to the other nuns.
2. It must be pointed out that not all those who have this humor are so troublesome, for those who are humble and good-natured, even though they are disturbed within themselves, do not hurt others, especially if they possess sound intelligence. And also there are greater and lesser degrees of this humor. Certainly, I believe the devil takes melancholy as a means for trying to win over some persons. And if they do not walk with great care, he will do so. For since this humor can subdue reason, what won't our passions do once reason is darkened? It seems that if reason is wanting, madness results, and so it does. But in those of whom we are now speaking, the melancholy doesn't reach the point of madness, which would be much less harmful. But to have to consider someone a rational person and deal with her as such even though she isn't is an unbearable burden. Those who are totally afflicted with this illness are to be pitied, but they do no harm, and if there is a means of bringing them under control, it is to put fear into them.
3. With those in whom this very harmful affliction has just begun, even though it is not so strong, the same remedy is necessary if other attempts prove insufficient. The affliction, in sum, springs from that humor or root and stems from that stock. And it is necessary that the prioress make use of the penances of the order and strive to bring these persons into submission in such a way as to make them understand they will obtain neither all nor part of what they want. For if they come to think that sometimes their cries, and the furies the devil speaks through them in order to bring them to ruin if he can, are sufficient for them to get what they want, they will be lost. And one such person is enough to disrupt the quiet of a monastery. Since the poor little thing has no one to help her defend herself from the things the devil puts before her, it is necessary for the prioress to proceed with the greatest care in governing her not only in exterior but also in interior matters. For since reason is obscured in the sick person, it must be clear in the prioress so that the devil doesn't begin to bring that soul under his control, taking that affliction as a means. Only at intervals does this humor afflict so much as to subdue reason. And then the person is not at fault, just as insane people are not at fault for the foolish things they do. But those who are not insane have some fault. Thus it is a dangerous thing if during the times in which they are ill they begin to take liberties, which is a terrible artifice of the devil. It's necessary that they do not do so; otherwise, they will not be masters of themselves when they are well. If we consider the matter, that which interests these melancholic persons most is getting their own way, saying everything that comes to their lips, looking at the faults of others with which they hide their own, and finding rest in what gives them pleasure; in sum, they are like a person who cannot bear anyone who resists him. Well, if the passions go unmortified, and each passion seeks to get what it wants, what would happen if no one resisted them?
4. I repeat, as one who has seen and dealt with many persons having this affliction, that there is no other remedy for it than to make these persons submit in all the ways and means possible. If words do not suffice, use punishment; if light punishment is not enough, try heavy; if one month in the prison cell is not enough, try four months; no greater good can be done for their souls. For as I have said and I repeat (and it is important for the afflicted themselves to understand this, even though at times they may be unable to help themselves), since the affliction is not confirmed madness of the kind that excuses one from any fault -- although sometimes it may be, but it is not always so -- the soul remains in much danger. But sometimes, as I say, reason is so overpowered that those afflicted will be forced to do or say what they did and said when they had no control. It is a great mercy from God toward those suffering this affliction that they may submit to someone who will govern them through this danger that I mentioned, for herein lies all their good. And, for the love of God, if anyone read this let her reflect that perhaps it is a matter of her own salvation.
5. I know some persons who are on the borderline of losing their minds completely. But they are humble and so fearful of offending God that even though they may be dissolving in tears and grieving within themselves, they don't do anything but what they are ordered to do. And they suffer their illness as others do theirs; although this one is a greater martyrdom. Thus they will have greater glory and have their purgatory here in this life instead of the next. But I repeat that those who do not submit willingly should be urged to do so by the prioress. And let them not be deceived with indiscreet pieties lest they end up disturbing all with their confusion.
6. There is another very great harm, leaving aside the danger that was mentioned: Since the afflicted nun appears to be good and the force the illness exercises interiorly is not understood, our nature is so miserable that each one will think that she herself is melancholic and that thus others must bear with her. And, in point of fact, the devil will cause the matter to be thus understood, and he will bring about such havoc that when one comes to recognize the fact there will be difficulty in providing a remedy. This matter is so important that no negligence whatsoever should be allowed. But if the melancholic nun should resist the prelate, who is the superior, she should pay for it in the same way as the healthy nun and should not be pardoned for anything. If she should utter an insulting word to her Sister, the same holds true. So likewise in all similar things.
7. It seems to be unjust to punish a sick person, who can't help it, just as one would a healthy person. Therefore, it would also be unjust to bind and whip the insane, and the just thing would be to allow them to kill everyone. Believe me, I have tried and, in my opinion, attempted many remedies, and I find no other. It absolutely must not be tolerated that the prioress out of pity allow such nuns to begin taking liberties, for when she gets down to remedying the situation much harm will have already been done to others. If the insane are bound and chastised so that they will not kill others, and this is right and even seems to be a very compassionate thing to do since they cannot control themselves, how much more must one be careful not to allow these melancholic persons liberties by which they could harm souls. And I truly believe that this affliction is often, as I have said, found in those whose dispositions are unrestrained, lacking in humility, and poorly disciplined; and the humor doesn't have as much strength as in the insane. I mean that "in some" the humor doesn't have as much strength, for I have seen that when there is someone to fear they do control themselves and they can. Well, why can't they do so for God? I fear that the devil, under the guise of this humor, as I have said, wants to gain many souls.
8. Nowadays the term is used more than usual, and it happens that all self-will and freedom go by the name melancholy. Thus I have thought that in these houses and in all Religious houses, this term should not be uttered. For the term seems to bring along with it freedom from any control. Rather, the condition should be called a serious illness -- and how truly it is one -- and be cared for as such. For sometimes it is very necessary to reduce the humor by means of medicine in order that it be endured; and the nun must remain in the infirmary and understand that when she comes out and returns to the community she must be humble like all and obey as do all. And she must understand that when she does not do so she may not use that humor as her defense. For the reasons that I have mentioned, and more could be said, this procedure is fitting. The prioress must, without letting these nuns realize it, lead them with much compassion, like a true mother, and seek whatever means she can to provide a remedy.
9. It seem that I am contradicting myself because up to now I said that these nuns must be dealt with strictly. So I repeat that they must not think they can come out and do what they want, nor should they be allowed out except under the condition that they must obey. For the harm lies in their thinking that they will be free to do whatever they want. But the prioress can refrain from ordering them to do what she sees they will be unable to do because of their not having the strength within themselves. She should lead them with all the skill and love necessary so that if possible they submit out of love, which would be much better, and usually happens. She should show that she greatly loves them and make this known through words and deeds. And she must note that the greatest remedy she has is to keep them much occupied with duties so that they do not have the opportunity to be imagining things, for herein lies all their trouble. And even though they may not perform these duties so well, she should suffer some defects so as not to have to suffer other greater ones that will arise if the melancholy overpowers them. I know that this is the most suitable remedy you can provide. And strive that they do not have long periods of prayer, not even those established in the constitutions, because, for the greater part, their imaginations are weak and the long prayer will do them much harm. Otherwise, they will fancy things that neither they nor anyone who hears them will ever understand. Let her take care that they eat fish only rarely; and also during the fasts, they ought not fast as much as do the others.
10. It seems excessive to give so much advice for this affliction and not for any other, there being so many serious ones in our miserable life, especially when considering the weakness of women. It is for two reasons that I do so: First, it seems these nuns are well, for they don't want to know that they have this affliction. Since it doesn't force them to stay in bed, because they do not have a fever, or to call the doctor, it's necessary for the prioress to be their doctor; for it is a sickness more prejudicial to all perfection than that of those who are in bed and in danger of death. Second, in the case of other illnesses it happens that either one is cured or one dies; with this illness, very seldom are the afflicted cured, nor do they die from it but they come to lose their minds completely -- which is a death capable of killing all the nuns. They suffer more than death in themselves through afflictions, fantasies, and scruples, all of which they call temptations, and so they will have a great deal of merit. If they could come to understand that the illness is the cause of these, they would find much relief provided they paid no attention to them.
Indeed, I have great compassion for them, and it is also right that all those living with them have it. These latter should reflect that the Lord can give this compassion, and they should bear up with them, without letting this be known as I have said. Please the Lord I may have succeeded in pointing out the proper thing to do in regard to so serious an illness.

CHAPTER 8
 
Some counsels concerning revelations and visions.
 
1. Some persons seem to become frightened just in hearing the words "visions" and "revelations." I don't understand why they consider this path along which God leads a soul such a dangerous one, or from where this dread comes. I do not want to treat now of which ones are good and which bad, or with the signs for discernment that I have heard from very learned persons; but of what ought to be done by someone who sees herself in this situation, for few are the confessors who will not intimidate her. Indeed, it doesn't cause as much fear or scandal to say that the devil is representing many kinds of temptation, the spirit of blasphemy, and absurd and indecent things as it does to say that an angel appeared or spoke or that our Lord Jesus Christ crucified was seen.
2. Nor do I want to treat at present of the revelations that are from God (for by now the fact that these bring great blessings to the soul goes without saying), but of the representations made by the devil in order to deceive and of how he makes use of the image of Christ our Lord, or of His saints. I hold that His Majesty will not give the devil the power to deceive a person by means of similar figures unless through that person's own fault, but that the devil himself will be the one deceived. (I mean, he will not deceive where there is humility). Thus, there is no reason to be terrified but to trust in the Lord and pay little attention to these things except for the sake of praising the Lord more.
3. I know a person whose confessors caused her much distress over similar things; but afterward, from what she could understand through the great effects and good works that resulted, she judged that her experiences were from God. And she was very distressed that because of the command they gave her she had to bless herself and make the fig when she saw a vision. Later, in talking with a highly learned Dominican, she was told by him that this was wrong, that no one should do so, for wherever we see the image of our Lord, it is good to pay it reverence, even if the devil may have painted it. The devil is a great painter, and in wanting to do us an evil deed, he rather does us a good one if he paints a crucifix or other image so lifelike that he leaves it engraven in our heart. This reasoning pleased me much, for when we see a very good painting, even though we might know that a bad man did it, we wouldn't fail to esteem the image that was painted nor would we pay attention to the painter and lose our devotion. For the good or the evil does not lie in the vision but in the one who sees it and in whether or not she profits by it with humility; for if humility is present, no harm can be done not even by the devil. And if humility is not present, even if the visions be from God they will be of no benefit. For if that favor which should humble a nun when she sees she is unworthy of it makes her proud, she will be like the spider that converts everything it eats into poison; or like the bee that converts it all into honey.
4. I want to explain myself further: Our Lord, through His goodness, may wish to represent Himself to a soul so that it might know or love Him more, or that He might show it one of His secrets, or grant it some particular gifts or favors. And if the soul, as I have said, considers itself a saint because of a favor (for it should be confounded and know how little its lowliness deserves any favor) and thinks that this favor comes to it because of some service it has rendered, clearly the great good that could result is converted into evil, as in the example of the spider. Well now, let us suppose that the devil so as to incite pride causes these apparitions. The soul may think they are from God, humble itself, recognize its unworthiness to receive so great a favor, and strive to serve more. For in seeing itself rich, while not even deserving to eat the crumbs that fall from the table, of the persons of whom it has heard that God grants these favors (I mean, not deserving to be a servant of any of them), it humbles itself, begins to force itself to do penance, prays more, and takes greater care not to offend this Lord. For it thinks it is He who grants this favor, and obeys with greater perfection. If it responds in these ways, I am sure the devil will not return, but will be put to shame, and that no harm will be left in the soul.
5. When she is told some things to do, or about the future, the nun should speak about the matter with a discreet and learned confessor, and not do or believe anything other than what he tells her. She can communicate about it with the prioress so that the latter might provide her with such a confessor. And let her be careful, for if she doesn't obey what the confessor tells her and fails to be guided by him, the experience comes from either the bad spirit or dreadful melancholy. Even if the confessor may not be right, she will be more right in not departing from what he tells her, even though it may be an angel of God who speaks to her in the favor. For His Majesty will enlighten the confessor or ordain how the task may be carried out. In following the above advice, there is no danger; in doing otherwise, there can be many dangers and much harm.
6. Let us keep in mind that human nature is very weak, especially in women, and in this way of prayer weakness show itself more. Thus it is necessary that we don't immediately think that every little thing that comes to our fancy is a vision, and we should believe that when a vision does occur, this will be clearly known. Where some melancholy is present, there is need for much greater care. For in regard to these fancies, things have been told to me that have left me amazed at how it is possible for such persons truly to think that they see what they do not see.
7. Once a confessor, who was much admired, came to see me, for he was confessor to a person who told him that for many days our Lady appeared to her, sat on her bed, and spoke for over an hour telling her about future events and a great deal more. Among many absurdities there were some predictions that turned out to be right, and as a result the apparitions were thought to be true. I understood immediately the nature of the experience, although I did not dare say so. For we are in a world in which it is necessary to consider the opinions others have of us in order that our words take effect. So I told him to wait to see if the prophecies would prove true and to look for other effects and inquire into the life of that person. In the end he came to understand that the whole thing was nonsense.
8. I could tell of so many things like this that would more than justify my advice, that is: that a soul should not believe things at once, but that it wait for time to pass and understand itself well before telling the confessor so that it doesn't deceive him without wanting to deceive him. For if he doesn't have experience of these things, his learning however great will not suffice for him to understand them. Not so long ago (in fact, very recently) there was a man who spoke much nonsense about things like these to some very learned and spiritual men. When he spoke with a person who had experienced such favors from the Lord, she saw clearly that he was suffering from madness together with illusion. Although the illusion wasn't then manifest but very dissimulated, the Lord after a while revealed it clearly; but this person who understood what the cause was had first to suffer much in not being believed.
9. For these reasons and other similar ones it's very necessary for each Sister to speak clearly about her prayer to the prioress. The prioress should carefully consider the temperament and perfection in virtue of that Sister so that she might advise the confessor and provide for better understanding. She should choose a confessor for this particular purpose if the ordinary confessor is not sufficient for such matters. Let the Sisters be very careful that things like these, even though very truly from God, or favors recognized as miraculous, be not communicated to outsiders or to confessors who don't have the prudence to be silent. This is most important, more so than they may think, and it's important that the Sisters not discuss these things among themselves. And the prioress, with prudence, should always be seen as tending more to praise those who distinguish themselves in matters pertaining to humility, mortification, and obedience than those God leads by this very supernatural path of prayer, even though the latter may have all these other virtues. For if this path is from the spirit of the Lord, it brings with it the humility to like being despised. And the praise of the above virtues will not harm the person who is led by this path and will benefit others. For since the others cannot attain to these things, for God gives to whomever He wants, let them flee sadness and seek to have the other virtues. Although God also gives these other virtues, they can in addition be the objects of our striving, and they are of great value for the Religious life. May His Majesty give them to us since no one who strives for them with effort, solitude, prayer, and confidence in His mercy will be denied by Him.

CHAPTER 9
 
Deals with how she left Medina del Campo for the foundation of St. Joseph in Malagón.
 
1. How far I've wandered from my subject! And yet, it could be that some of these counsels that were mentioned were more opportune than my telling about the foundations. Well now, while at St. Joseph's in Medina del Campo I observed with great consolation how those Sisters were following in the footsteps of the Sisters of St. Joseph's in Avila through complete religious dedication, sisterly love, and spirituality. I observed, too, how our Lord provided for His house, for the needs of the chapel as well as for those of the Sisters. Some of the new ones entering the monastery it seemed the Lord had chosen as the kind of cement that is suited to an edifice like this. In these beginning stages, all the good, I think, will be for the sake of the future. For since these Sisters find the path, those who are to come will follow it.
2. There was a lady in Toledo, a sister of the Duke of Medinaceli, in whose home I had stayed by order of my superiors, as I mentioned more at length in writing about the foundation of St. Joseph's. While I was in her home, she got to like me in a special way, which in turn must have been a means by which this lady was stirred to do what she did. For His Majesty often makes use of means like these that seem fruitless to us who don't know the future. Since this lady knew that I had permission to found monasteries, she began to urge me very much to make a foundation in her town of Malagón. I in no way wanted to accept since the town was so small that we would be forced to have an income in order to support ourselves -- something to which I was very much opposed.
3. Both my confessor and other learned men with whom I discussed the matter told me that I was doing wrong, that since the holy Council had given permission to have an income, I shouldn't, because of my own opinion, fail to found a monastery where God could be so much served. To this were added the many urgings of this lady which I could not resist. She provided a sufficient income, for I am always in favor of monasteries being either completely poor or maintained in such a way that the nuns will not need to beg from anyone for their needs.
4. I made every effort I could so that none of the nuns would possess anything, but that they would observe the constitutions in their entirety as in our other monasteries founded in poverty. Having completed all the paper work, I sent for some Sisters to make the foundation, and along with that lady we went to Malagón. When we got there, the house was not yet ready for us to move in. And so we were detained for more than eight days in an apartment of this lady's castle.
5. On Palm Sunday, in the year 1568, with the people of the town, we went in procession to the church, in our white mantles and with veils covering our faces. A sermon was preached there, and from that church the Blessed Sacrament was brought to our monastery. This inspired great devotion in everybody. I stayed there for some days. On one of those days, while in prayer after having received Communion, I understood from our Lord that He would be served in that house. I don't think I was there quite two months, for my spirit was eager to go and found a house in Valladolid, and the reason was the one I will now mention.

CHAPTER 10
 
Deals with the foundation of the house in Valladolid. Its title is The Conception of Our Lady of Mount Carmel.
 
1. Four or five months before this monastery of St. Joseph's in Malagón was founded, I was speaking with a distinguished young gentlemen who told me that if I wanted to establish a monastery in Valladolid he would most willingly give me a house he owned with a large and good garden containing a vineyard. He wanted to give away the property immediately; it was very valuable. I accepted his offer, although I wasn't too decided on making a foundation where the property was, since the place was about a quarter of a league outside the city. But it seemed to me that we could move to the city once the possession of a house had been taken in that district. And since he offended it so willingly, I did not want to refuse his good deed or hinder his devotion.
2. Two months later, more or less, he was struck by a sudden illness that took away his speech, and he could not confess well, although he made many signs to ask the Lord's pardon. He died shortly afterward, very far from where I was. The Lord told me that the young man's salvation had been in great jeopardy but that he had received mercy for the service he had rendered to the Blessed Mother in giving that house to be a monastery of her order; however, that he would not leave purgatory until the first Mass was said there, that then he would leave. I was so conscious of the grievous afflictions of this soul that even though I wanted to make a foundation in Toledo, I set it aside for then and hastened as much as I could to found a house in Valladolid.
3. It couldn't be made as quickly as I desired, for I was forced to delay a number of days as St. Joseph's in Avila, which was under my charge, and afterward at St. Joseph's in Medina del Campo, for I passed by there. I was in prayer one day in Medina when the Lord told me to hurry because that soul was suffering very much. Although I didn't have the means available, I set to work and entered Valladolid on the feast of St. Lawrence. And when I saw the house, I was dismayed; I knew that it would be a foolish mistake for nuns to stay there. The cost to them would be very great. For although the site was most gratifying on account of the garden which was so delightful, the nuns would certainly become sick, for it was near a river.
4. Though tired out, I had to go to Mass at a monastery of our order. I saw that the monastery was at the entrance to the city, and this was so far away that my distress was doubled. Nonetheless, I said nothing to my companions so as not to discourage them. Although weak, I had some faith that the Lord, by whom I had been told what was just mentioned, would provide a remedy. I arranged very secretly for workmen to come and begin building walls to provide for recollection, and other necessary things. With us, were the priest I mentioned, Julián de Avila, and one of the friars mentioned, who desired to be discalced and who was learning about our method of procedure in these houses. Julián de Avila was engaged in seeking to obtain the license from the bishop, who, before I arrived, had given us reason to hope that it would be granted. The license could not be gotten so quickly as to prevent a Sunday from coming along first. But permission was granted to say Mass where the church would be, and thus it was said for us.
5. I had forgotten that what was told to me about that soul would then be accomplished. For, although I was told "at the first Mass," I thought that it would be at the one in which the Blessed Sacrament would be reserved. When the priest came with the Blessed Sacrament to the place where we were to receive Communion and I approached to receive it, the gentleman I mentioned appeared beside him, his face joyful and resplendent. With hands folded, he thanked me for what I had done so that he could leave purgatory and go to heaven. And indeed before the first locution, when I heard that he was on the way to salvation, I had not had such a thing in mind and was consequently much afflicted. It seemed to me that another way of dying would have been necessary in view of the way he had lived. For although he had performed many good deeds, he was much involved in the things of the world. True, though, he had told my companions that he kept death very much before him. It is important to know that our Lord is pleased with any service rendered to His Mother, and great is His mercy. May He be blessed and praised for everything. For He repays our lowly deeds with eternal life and glory, and He makes them great while they are in fact of little value.
6. Well, when the feastday of our Lady's Assumption arrived, which was August 15, 1568, we took possession of this monastery. We were there only a short while because almost all of us fell very sick. This was seen by a lady from that city, Doña María de Mendoza, who is the wife of Commander Cobos and mother of the marquis of Camarasa. She is a very Christian woman and most charitable. The superabundance of alms she gave away made this clear. When she saw the situation, and before I spoke to her about the matter, she showed me much charity; for she is the sister of the bishop of Avila who was very favorable toward us in the foundation of the first monastery and is still so in all that pertains to our order. Since she is very charitable and saw that we could not remain there without great hardship and also that the site was far from where we could receive alms, as well as unhealthy, she told us to give that house to her and that she would buy us another. And this she did. The one she gave us was worth much more, and in addition she has given all that is necessary up till now, and she will do so as long as she lives.
7. On the feast of St. Blaise we moved there in a large procession, and with great devotion shown on the part of the people; and their devotedness continues even to this day, for the Lord grants many favors in that house. And He has brought souls whose sanctity in due time will be recounted so that He may be praised. For it is by such means that the Lord desires to magnify His works and favor His creatures. In fact, a very young girl entered there and showed what the world is by despising it. It has occurred to me to speak of her here so that those who have great love for the world will be put to shame and that young girls to whom the Lord may give good desires and inspirations will take her example and carry them out.
8. There is in this place a lady named Doña María de Acuña, a sister of the Count of Buendía. She was married to the governor of Castile. When he died, she was left, while still quite young, with a son and two daughters. She began to live so holy a life and rear her children in such virtue that she merited from the Lord that He desire these children for Himself. (I was mistaken, for she was left with three daughters.) The one daughter became a nun immediately. The other one did not want to marry but lived a very edifying life with her mother. The son at an early age began to understand what the world was and felt so intensely God's call to enter religious life that no one was able to prevent him from following it. His mother was so delighted with his vocation that she helped him very much by her prayers to our Lord, although for fear of his relatives she did not show this openly. In sum, when the Lord wants a soul for Himself, creatures have little strength to prevent this. So it happened in this case, for after having been delayed for three years and strongly urged to change his mind, he entered the Society of Jesus. A confessor of this lady told me that he had been informed by her that she had never in her life experienced such joy in her heart as on the day her son made his profession.
9. O Lord! What a great favor You grant to those children whose parents love them so much as to want them to possess their estates, inheritance, and riches in that blessed life that has no end! It is a great pity the world is now so unfortunate and blind that it seems to parents their honor lies in not letting the dung of this world's goods be forgotten and in not remembering that sooner or later these things will come to an end. And everything that has limits, even though it lasts a while, will eventually come to an end; and little importance should be given to it. Such parents want to sustain their own vanities at a cost to their children, and very boldly take from God souls that He wants for Himself. And they take from these souls a good so great (God inviting them to be His guest) that, even were the good not to last forever, it would still be extraordinary to see oneself freed from the tiresomeness of the world and its laws; and the more goods people possess, the greater the tedium. Open the eyes of parents, my God. Make them understand the kind of love they are obliged to have for their children so that they do not do these children so much wrong and are not complained about before God in that final judgment where, even though they may not want to know it, the value of each thing will be understood.
10. Well, this gentleman, who was the son of this Doña María de Acuña (his name was Don Antonio de Padilla), at the age of seventeen, more or less, was mercifully drawn by God from the world. Hence, the estates went to the oldest daughter, whose name was Doña Luisa de Padilla. For the Count of Buendía had no sons, and Don Antonio was heir to both the earldom and the governorship of Castile. I will not mention the many things Don Antonio suffered from his relatives before going on with his plan, because this is not my purpose in writing. Whoever knows how much value those of the world place on their having an heir to their properties will fully understand.
11. O Son of the Eternal Father, Jesus Christ, our Lord, true King of all! What did You leave in the world? What could we, your descendants, inherit from You? What did You possess, my Lord, but trials, sufferings, and dishonor? You had nothing but a wooden beam on which to swallow the painfully difficult drink of death. In sum, my God, it does not fit those of us who want to be your true children, and hold on to their inheritance, to flee suffering. Your heraldry consists of five wounds. Courage, then, my daughters; this must be our badge if we are to inherit His kingdom. Not with rest, not with favors, not with honors, not with riches will that which He bought with so much blood by gained. O illustrious people! Open your eyes for the love of God; behold that the true knights of Jesus Christ and the princes of His Church, a St. Peter and a St. Paul, did not follow the road you follow. Do you think perhaps there will be a new road for you? Do not believe it. Behold the Lord is beginning to show it to you through such young persons as those of whom we are now speaking.
12. At times I have seen and spoken to this Don Antonio. He would have wanted even many more possessions so as to leave them all. Blessed the young man and blessed the young girl who have merited so much from God that at the age in which people are usually overpowered by the world, they trampled on it. Blessed be He who bestowed on them so much good.
13. Well since the estates were left to the older sister, it happened that she didn't attribute any more importance to them than did her brother. For from the time she was a child she gave herself so much to prayer (which is the place where the Lord gives the light to understand truths) that she esteemed these things as little as did her brother. Oh, God help me, how many trials, torments, litigations, and even risking of lives and honor many would undergo to be heir to this inheritance. She suffered greatly in order to be allowed to renounce it. So goes this world; it would clearly show us its frenzy if we were not blind. Very willingly, so that they might leave her free from this inheritance, she renounced it in favor of her sister -- for there was no one else -- who was ten or eleven years old. Immediately, in order to perpetuate their miserable family name, her relatives arranged to have this young girl marry an uncle of hers, the brother of her father, and obtained a dispensation from the Supreme Pontiff; and the two were engaged.
14. The Lord did not desire that the daughter of such a mother and the sister of both such a brother and such sisters be left more deceived than they, and thus what I will now relate happened. When the girl began to enjoy the worldly clothes and finery that, in accord with her status, would attract the fancy of a girl at that tender age (two months had not yet gone by from the time of her engagement), the Lord began to give her light, although she was not then aware of what He was doing. Once at the close of a day she had spent most happily with her fiancé, whom she loved more intensely than her age warranted, she became extremely sad at seeing how the day came to an end and that likewise all days would come to an end. Oh, greatness of God! That very happiness that the joys of perishable things gave her, she came to abhor! She began to experience such great sadness that she couldn't hide it from her fiancé, nor did she know how to tell him, nor could she, even though he was questioning her.
15. At that time she had to go on an unavoidable journey to a place far from where she lived. She felt very sorry since she loved him so much. But soon the Lord revealed to her the cause of her affliction; it was, in fact, that her soul was inclined toward that which would have no end. She began to consider how her brother and sister had chosen the safer path and left her amid the world's dangers. This, on the one hand; on the other hand, the fact that it seemed there was no remedy was exhausting her (for she wasn't aware, until she asked, that even though she was engaged it was still possible for her to become a nun). And above all, the love she had for her fiancé did not allow her to come to a decision. So she was suffering much distress.
16. Since the Lord wanted her for Himself, He gradually took away this love she had for her fiancé and increased her desire to give up everything. At this time she was moved only by the desire to be saved and to seek the best means. For it seemed to her that in the midst of the things of the world she would forget to seek that which is eternal. This is the wisdom God infused in her at so early an age; to seek how to gain that which is without end. Fortunate soul that so early in life freed itself from the blindness in which many old people die! Once she saw that her will was free, she resolved to occupy it completely in God. Until that time she had remained silent; now she began to speak of the matter to her sister. Her sister, thinking it was a childish trifle, tried to dissuade her and told her some things about how she could be saved even though married. The young girl responded by asking her sister why she herself had given up marriage. Some days passed, and her desire went on increasing. She didn't say anything to her mother, but perhaps it was the mother who through her prayers was causing this battle in her daughter.

