1. I confess, first of all, my imperfect obedience at the outset of this writing. Even though I desire the virtue of obedience more than anything else, beginning this work has been the greatest mortification for me, and I have felt a strong repugnance toward doing so. May it please our Lord that I succeed in saying something, for I trust only in His mercy and in the humility of the one who ordered me to write this, so that, through that humility, God, who is powerful, will do the work and not depend on me.
2. It seems an inappropriate thing to begin with temporal matters. Yet I think that these are most important for the promotion of the spiritual good, although in monasteries founded in poverty this doesn't seem to be so. But in all monasteries it is necessary to have good order and attend to matters concerning government and the harmonious organization of everything.
3. First, let it be presupposed as extremely appropriate that the visitor so behave toward the nuns that even though on the one hand he is affable and loving, on the other hand he makes it known that in essential matters he will be strict and by no means lenient. I don't believe there is anything in the world that harms a visitator as much as does being unfeared and allowing subjects to deal with him as with an equal. This is true especially in the case of women. Once they know that the visitator is so soft that he will pass over their faults and change his mind so as not to sadden them, he will have great difficulty in governing them.
4. It is very necessary that they understand there is some one in command, who is not tenderhearted, when it comes to matters that would weaken the religious observance. The judge must be so upright in administering justice that they become convinced he will not turn aside from whatever might be more perfect and for the greater service of God even if the whole world crumbles. And they must understand that he will be affable and loving toward them as long as he knows there is no fault in the above. Just as it is necessary that he also show compassion and that he love them as a father -- and this is very important for their consolation and that he not alienate them -- so are these other qualities I mentioned necessary. And if either of these be lacking, it is incomparably better that the latter be lacking than the former.
5. The official visitation should take place once a year so that with love faults may be gradually corrected and removed. For if the nuns do not understand that at the end of the year those who have committed them will be corrected and punished, year after year goes by and the religious observance becomes so lax that when one wants to provide a remedy it is impossible to do so. Although the fault lies with the prioress, and even though she is changed for another, the nuns grow accustomed to the relaxation in observance. In our human nature custom is a terrible thing, and little by little, through small things, irremediable harm is done to the order. The visitator who does not provide a remedy in time will have to give a terrible accounting to God.
6. It seems to me that by dealing with these matters I'm being offensive to these monasteries of the Virgin, our Lady, since through the Lord's goodness they are far removed from any need for this severity. But it is my fear that makes me say this, a fear stemming from the fact that with time, through a lack of carefulness at the beginning, laxity usually creeps into monasteries. Also I see that each day through the goodness of God the nuns are making more progress. And in some communities there might have been some failure if the visitator had not done what I am saying here about severity in remedying these little things and deposing the prioresses whom they found were not suited for the job.
7. In this latter regard, especially, there must be no pity, because many prioresses will be very holy but not suited for the office of prioress, and it's necessary to remedy the matter quickly. Here, where there is so much concern for mortification and practices of humility, this will not be taken as an offense. If a nun should take it as an offense, it's obvious that she is not suited for the office. Anyone who has so little perfection that she wants to be prioress should not be governing souls who are so much involved with the pursuit of perfection.
8. The visitator must keep God in mind and the favor the Lord has granted to these houses lest because of him the favor be lessened; and he should cast out all feelings of pity. The devil causes these for the sake of doing great harm. This pity is the greatest cruelty the visitator could show to the nuns.
9. It's impossible that all those elected prioresses will have the talent for the office. When it is realized that they do not, the first year should by no means pass without their being removed from office. In one year not much harm can be done but if three go by she could destroy the monastery by allowing imperfections to become the custom. And removing her from office is so extremely important that even if it kills him, because he thinks she is holy and her intentions good, he should force himself to do so. This is the only thing I ask, for the love of God. And if he should see that the nuns who are electing a prioress solicit or campaign, which God forbid, he should nullify the election and nominate prioresses from other monasteries for them to choose from. For no good can come from an election made in this way.
10. I don't know if what I've said belongs to the temporal or spiritual order. What I wanted to begin with is that the visitator should examine very carefully and attentively the financial records and not pass over them lightly. Especially in houses having an income, it is very important that the expenses not exceed the income even though the community may have to go without something. For if they spend in accordance with their means, those houses founded with an income will have enough and get along very well, glory to God. Otherwise, if the community begins to go into debt, it will gradually be ruined. For in the event of great need, it will seem inhuman to major superiors to forbid individuals to keep money earned from their work or that relatives provide for them or similar things that are the practice now in different monasteries. I would unquestionably prefer to see a monastery dissolved than to see it reach such a state. This is why I said that a lack of care in temporal matters can cause great harm in spiritual matters, and thus this advice is most important. In the monasteries founded in poverty, the visitator should examine carefully and advise strongly so that the nuns do not go into debt, because if they have faith and serve God, they will not be in want -- unless they spend too much.
11. In the monasteries, both those founded in poverty and those with an income, the visitator should learn in detail about the ration of food the nuns are given and about how they are treated, especially the sick, and he should see to it that the needs of the nuns are sufficiently taken care of. The Lord never fails to provide for these needs as long as the prioress has courage and diligence; experience teaches this.
12. In both kinds of monasteries he should take note of the work that is being done and even record what the nuns have earned by the work of their hands. This is useful for two reasons: first, so as to encourage and thank those who have done a great deal; second, so that in those monasteries where there is not so much care taken about work because there is not so much need the nuns may be told about what others earn. This keeping record of the handwork that is done, apart from the temporal advantages, has advantages in every other respect. And it is very consoling to the nuns when they are at work to know that it will be seen by the visitator. Even through this is not an important matter, we women who live so enclosed a life and whose consolation is found in pleasing the visitator should be treated at times with a sensitive understanding of our weaknesses.
13. He should inquire whether there is any excess in gift giving. This is particularly necessary in houses having an income, for prioress could overdo it and destroy the monasteries through what seems of little importance. Should it happen that a prioress is extravagant, the nuns could be left without food, it having been given away, as has happened in some monasteries. For this reason, it is necessary to reflect on what can be done, on the amount of alms that can be given in accord with the income, and to have a reasonable and fixed amount for everything.
14. He should not easily consent to houses that are too large, or allow the nuns, without great necessity, to go into debt in order to build or add on to them. And for this it would be necessary to give the order that no construction be undertaken without informing the major superior and giving an account of where it is to be done so that he may judge whether or not to give the permission. This should not be taken to refer to little things that cannot do much harm. But it is better that the nuns suffer the trouble of not having a good house than that they be worried, and disedifying to others, because of debts and lack of food.
15. It is very important that he always inspect the whole house to determine how recollection is preserved, for it is good that he remove the occasions and not trust in the sanctity he sees however great; no one knows the future. And thus it is necessary to think of all the evil that could arise, so that, as I say, the occasion may be removed. He should observe especially whether there be two grates at the grille in the parlor, one on the outside and one on the inside, and whether they are such that no hand can reach through. This is very important. He should look at the confessionals and see to it that the curtains are nailed over the confessional window and that the Communion window is small. The door at the entrance should have two bolts and there should be two keys for the door to the enclosure, as the Acts ordain, one of which is kept by the portress and the other by the prioress. I know that this is done now, but so that it will not be forgotten, I have put it down here, for it is always necessary that these things be looked into and that the nuns see that the visitator does so, and thus there will be no carelessness about them.
16. It is very important that he inquire about the chaplain, who the confessor is and whether there is more communication with him than necessary. And he should inquire very particularly about this from the nuns and also about the preservation of recollection in the house. And if some nun should be tempted to misjudge, he ought to listen to her very carefully. Even though often what she thinks will not be so, and she will exaggerate it, he can inquire about the truth from the other nuns putting them under the precept of obedience. And having found out the truth, he should afterward reprimand her severely so that this will not happen again.
17. And if some of the nuns are taken up with trifles or exaggerate things without there being any fault on the part of the prioress, it's necessary to be strict with them and get them to realize their own blindness so that they don't go about disturbed. If they become aware that their conduct is no benefit to them but recognized for what it is, they will be quiet. When there is nothing serious, the prioresses should always be supported, even though the faults may be corrected. For the sake of peace and quiet, the simplicity of perfect obedience is a great help. The devil could tempt some nuns with the notion that they know better than the prioress and should go about always paying attention to things that matter little, and they could do much harm to themselves. The discreet visitator will recognize this and help them improve, although if they are melancholic he will have a great deal to do. He should never be softhearted with these latter, for if they think they're going to get somewhere, they'll never stop being a bother, nor will they themselves be at rest. They must realize always that they will be punished and that they must consequently support the prioress.
18. If some nun should perhaps speak of being transferred to another monastery, he must answer in such a way that neither she nor anyone would think that this is ever something possible. For no one except the one who has seen it happen can know the tremendous troubles that are apt to arise and how the door is open for the devil to tempt the nuns when they think it is possible to transfer from their monastery. They shouldn't think this no matter how great their reasons. And even if a transfer should have to be made, they must not be aware of the reason or think that it was made because they wanted it. Other subterfuges should be used, for she will never settle down anywhere, and much harm will be done to the other nuns. Let the nuns understand that the visitator will never in any way trust the nun who is trying to get a transfer from her house, and that even if he should have to transfer her, I mean because of some need or for some foundation, he will not do so if she is trying for one. This is all right to do because these temptations never come except to melancholics or those of such a temperament that they are not much help for anything. And perhaps it would even be good, before anyone try to do this, that he speak in a conference to the community about how harmful this is and the poor opinion he will have of the one who considers this temptation, and he should give his reasons and explain how no one any longer can be transferred and that until now there were some occasions in which a transfer was necessary.
19. He should require whether the prioress has some particular friendship with a nun, doing more for this one than for the others. As for the rest, he shouldn't bother unless there is some extreme, for prioresses need to deal more with those who have greater intelligence and discretion. And since our human nature doesn't allow us to recognize ourselves for what we are, each nun thinks she is an expert. Thus, the devil tempts them through trifles coming from inside so that there will always be war; but merit can be gained by resisting. Therefore, it will seem to them that this nun, or these others, are governing the prioress. The visitator should try to get her to moderate any excess that there may be in this friendship because it would occasion a great temptation for the weak nuns. But the friendship should not be taken away entirely, for, as I say, these persons could be the kind for whom it is necessary. However, it is always good to insist that there be no great familiarity with anyone. Soon the true colors will be seen.
20. There are some so extremely perfect, in their opinion, that everything they see seems to be a fault, and these are always the ones who have more faults themselves. But they don't see them and they put all the blame on the poor prioress or on the others. Thus they could fool the visitator into wanting to correct what is being done well. It is, as a result, necessary to avoid believing one nun alone, as I have said, and to inquire about something from the others before correcting it. In a monastery where there is so much rigor, life would become unbearable if each visitator, in each visitation, were to make new decrees. This is very important. Thus he should not make any decrees, unless the matter is serious and, as I say, he has inquired fully of the prioress herself and the other nuns about the correction he wants to make, and about why and how it should be done. For the nuns could become so weighed down with decrees that, unable to observe them, they will also give up what is more important in the rule.
21. What the visitator should insist upon is that the nuns observe the constitutions. A prioress who takes great liberty in breaking the laws of the constitutions and does so for little reason or habitually, thinking that this or that matters little, will do great harm to the house. Let this be understood, and if it doesn't appear so at once, time will prove it. This is the reason monasteries and even religious orders have gone so astray in some places. They pay little attention to small matters and hence come to fall in very great ones. The visitator should insist publicly with the nuns that they inform him of any fault in the monastery with regard to the constitutions and that if he should learn of something afterward he will punish severely the person who should have informed him. With this, the prioresses will be fearful and will proceed carefully.
22. It's necessary to avoid compromising with the prioress whether she becomes sad or not. Let her understand that this method of procedure is to be always followed and that the main reason she was elected to office is that she foster observance of the rule and constitutions and not remove or add according to her own whim and that there will be someone who will watch this and inform the visitator. I hold that it is impossible for any prioress to fulfill her office well if she becomes upset that the visitator learned of something she does. A sign that something is not done fully for the service of God is that I do not want it known by the one who stands in His place. And, thus, the visitator should note whether there is openness and truth in the things the nuns discuss with him, and if there is not, he should reprimand them with great severity and strive by means of warnings to the prioress or officeholders, or by using other procedures, to foster this openness. Even though the nuns may not lie, they can cover up some things. But the head, through whose government one lives, must know everything. It isn't right for the nuns to hide what must be corrected from the visitator, for a good body can do nothing without a head, and he is no less than that.
23. I conclude this matter by saying that if the constitutions are observed everything will run smoothly. If there is no great care for their observance or that of the rule, visitations will be of little avail -- this is the reason for them -- unless the prioresses are changed. And even the nuns in the community may be transferred if, God forbid, this has already become a custom, and other nuns who are faithful in keeping the religious observance brought in, as though one were newly founding the monastery. And the former nuns should be divided and each placed in a different monastery, for one or two of them will not be able to do much harm in a well-regulated monastery.
24. It should be noted that there may be prioresses who will ask for some freedom with regard to certain things against the constitutions and will give, perhaps, enough reasons, in their opinion. Either they will perhaps know no better or they will try to make the visitator think this is appropriate. And even though these things may not go against the constitutions, they could be of such kind that it would be harmful to admit them. Since the visitator is not present, he doesn't know what harm there can be -- and we know how to exaggerate in order to get what we want. For this reason the best policy is to keep the door closed to anything that is not in conformity with the way things are going now since we see that they are going well and are proven by experience. The certain is better than the doubtful. And in these cases the visitator must be firm and not worry about saying no. Rather, he should act with the freedom and holy authority I mentioned at the beginning so that he is indifferent as to whether he pleases or displeases the prioresses and the nuns in matters that otherwise could cause some trouble in the future. And the fact that something is a novelty is reason enough for not starting it.
25. In regard to the permission to accept nuns, a very important matter, the visitator should not give it without receiving a full account. And he should inquire himself, if he is in a place where it is possible to do so, for there can be prioresses so fond of taking in nuns as to be satisfied with little. And if the prioress wants to admit someone and says that she is well informed, her subjects almost always agree with what she wants. But it could happen that the prioress might be inclined to admit an aspirant because she is a friend or relative or out of some other personal considerations. And she will think she is right and yet be wrong.
26. Any mistake made in admitting nuns can be easily remedied. But before allowing them to make profession, it is necessary to be most careful. If there are novices, the visitators at the time of the visitation should inquire about them so that he may make an informed judgment when the time comes to grant the license for profession. Possibly the novice is a friend and protégée of the prioress, and the subjects do not dare speak their mind; but they will to the visitator. And thus, if possible, it would be a good thing to delay the profession, if the time for it is near, until the superior comes to make his visitation. If it seems fitting, he should even tell them to send him the results of the secret balloting as is done for the election. So important is it not to keep anyone in the monastery who will be the cause of trouble and restlessness all her life that every care taken will be well worthwhile.
27. In the receiving of lay Sisters, it is necessary to take careful note because almost all the prioresses are fond of having many lay Sisters, and the houses become filled up, and sometimes with those who can do little work. Thus it's very necessary for him not to yield right away if he sees no notable need. He should inquire about the number of lay Sisters, for since the number has not been established, great harm can be done if there is no prudence about accepting them.
28. An effort should always be made in each house that the number of nuns be less than that allowed so that some vacancies may remain, for it could happen that someone, whom it would be very advantageous for the house to accept, might want to enter, and there will be no room. By no means should one consent to go beyond the fixed number, for this would open the door to no less than the destruction of the monasteries. For this reason it is better to deny what might be advantageous to one monastery than to do harm to them all. It could be, and this would be a remedy, that if in another monastery the number is not complete a nun could transfer to that monastery so that the aspirant might enter. But the nun who is transferring should be given the dowry or alms she brought with her, if she did so, since she will be in the other monastery permanently. But if this should be impossible, let what must be lost be lost, and let not something so harmful to everyone be started. The provincial must necessarily be informed when permission is sought concerning the number of nuns so that he can decide what is fitting; in something so important it's not right to trust the prioresses.
29. It's necessary for the visitator to inquire about whether the prioresses have added more vocal prayers and penances than is obligatory. It could happen that each one, according to her own taste, might add particular things and so burden the nuns that they will lose their health and not be able to do what they are obliged to do. This must not be understood to apply when on some day there is a certain need. But there are usually some prioresses so indiscreet that they do this almost habitually, and the nuns do not dare speak, thinking this would show a lack of devotion. Nor is it right that they do speak except with the visitator.
30. He should look into how the vocal prayer is said in choir, whether chanted or recited, and inquire as to whether it is done slowly, and the chanting should be done in a soft voice which is edifying and in conformity with the life we profess. Chanting with a loud voice is doubly harmful: first, it sounds bad because the vocal prayer is not being sung; second, the reserve and spirit of our way of life are lost. If the above is not greatly insisted upon, they will go to excess and take away the devotion of those who hear them. The voices should be subdued and not manifest any concern on the part of the nuns about sounding nice to those who are listening. This concern has become almost universal, and it seems there will no longer be any remedy for it since it has become fashionable, and thus it is necessary to stress the above a great deal.
31. In regard to important commands, it would be very good for the visitator to order one of the nuns, under obedience, in the presence of the prioress, to write to him if any of the commands is not observed so that the prioress understands that the nun cannot do otherwise. The visitator thereby would in a way be present, for the nuns will proceed more carefully and be on their guard not to go against any of his orders.
32. Before the visitation takes place it would be appropriate for him to stress strongly how wrong it would be for prioresses to take offense at Sisters who tell the visitator of faults they have seen. Even though these Sisters may be incorrect in their judgment, they are nonetheless obliged in conscience to do this. And in a place where mortification is the practice, it is a sure sign that a prioress is not fit to govern if she takes offense at the nuns on account of a deed that should please her because it helps her to serve our Lord and fulfill her office better. The next time they will not dare speak knowing that the visitator will go away and that they will be left with trouble; and everything could gradually grow lax. The visitator should make his remarks however holy the prioress may be, and should not be trustful in this matter, for our human nature is weak and the enemy so skillful that when there are no other things with which to tempt he will strike hard here and perhaps gain what he loses elsewhere.
33. It is most fitting that the visitator observe great secrecy in everything and that the prioress be unable to ascertain who the informer is. For, as I have said, these nuns are still on earth. And if, for no other reason, he should do so at least for the sake of removing some temptation, how much more if the temptation is one that could do much harm.
34. If the things they say about the prioresses are not important, the visitator could make them known in a roundabout way so that it will not be known that the nuns have informed him. It is most fitting that insofar as possible he let the prioresses think that the nuns have nothing to say against them. But in important matters it is better that the situation be corrected than that the prioresses be pleased.
35. It is very important that he inquire whether any money gets into the hands of the prioresses without the knowledge of the key-bearers, for this could happen without her adverting to it, or even whether she possesses anything except in conformity with the constitutions. This is also necessary in houses founded in poverty. It seems to me I have said this before, and the same will happen with other things; but as the days go by I forget and do not want to take the time to read this order.
36. It will be very bothersome for the visitator to attend to the many trifling matters referred to here, but it will be more bothersome for him when from his not doing so he sees the backsliding that will result. As I have said, however holy the nuns may be, it is necessary for him to attend to these matters. And, as I have said at the beginning, the most important thing in the government of women is the necessity of their understanding that they have a head who will not be moved for anything on earth and that he has to observe and comply with all that pertains to religious observance and to punish what is contrary to it. They must perceive that he takes special care about this in each house and that he not only makes a visitation once a year but wants to know what they are doing every day. In this way, they will go on growing in perfection rather than diminishing, for women, in general, are upright and fearful.
37. And what I said is very important so that there be no carelessness. And sometimes, when necessary, action should accompany words; if he punishes one for something, others will avoid it. If out of compassion, or for other motives, he does the opposite at the beginning, when things are small, he will be forced to act more rigorously afterward. And these acts of pity will turn out to be the greatest cruelty, and he will have to render an exact account to God, our Lord.
38. There are some nuns with such great simplicity that they think it is a serious fault on their part to tell the visitator about the faults of the prioresses in matters that have to be corrected. These nuns must be told that even though they may think this an unworthy action they are obliged to do so and also that they should beforehand humbly tell the prioress when they see that she is at fault in observing the constitutions or in matters of importance, for it could be that she doesn't realize this. They should even tell her to correct it, and if afterward she is displeased with them, they should accuse her. There is much ignorance about what to do in these visitations, and thus it is necessary that the visitator discreetly call their attention to this and instruct them.
39. It is very important to inquire about procedures concerning the confessor, and not from one or two nuns but from all of them, and about how much power he is given. Since he is not the vicar, nor must there ever be one, for this office was taken away so that he might not have such power, it is important that communication with him be only very moderate, and the less there is the better. And the prioress should be very careful with regard to giving gifts and complimentary presents, unless they are very small; although sometimes one cannot avoid giving something. The prioress should rather pay the chaplain more than what is his due from the chaplaincy than have this concern, for it brings with it may troubles.
40. It is also necessary to counsel the prioresses not to be too generous and liberal but to keep in mind that they are obliged to reflect on how they spend money. They are no more than stewards and must not spend as if the money were their own but according to reason and with great care so that their expenditures are not excessive. Apart from the obligation not to disedify, the prioress is obliged in conscience to use this care and to take charge of temporal matters, and not keep especially for herself anything that the others do not have, unless the key to a desk or drawer for keeping papers, I mean letters or similar things, for it is right that these be kept secret, especially if they contain some counsels from the provincial.
41. He should observe whether the habit and toque are made as prescribed in the constitutions. If, God forbid, there should appear at some time something that seems to be an adornment, and not very edifying, he should make the nun burn it in his presence. By his doing something like this, the nuns will be frightened and correct the fault, and the incident will be recounted to those who come in the future.
42. He should also notice their matter of speaking, that it be simple, plain, and religious, more in the style of hermits and solitaries, and that they don't begin to adapt the latest fashionable expressions or the sweet talk, I believe they call it, used in the world, for new things are ever coming into style. In these matters, let them glory in appearing somewhat boorish rather than highly polished.
43. Insofar as possible they should avoid lawsuits, for the Lord will by other means grant them what they might lose by foregoing a lawsuit. He should always guide them so that they will keep to what is more perfect, and he should order them not to undertake or undergo any lawsuits without informing the provincial and following his special orders.
44. He should warn them, with respect to new members being received into the community, to esteem the personal talents of aspirants more than what they bring with them. No one should be admitted out of self-interest, but in accord with the constitutions, especially if there is some fault in that person's temperament.
45. It is necessary that visitators of the future follow what is done now by the provincial that the Lord has given us. I have taken much of what I've said here from observing his visitations, especially the following point: he shows no more familiarity to one Sister (in such a way that he spends time alone with her or writes to her) than he does to all, but he shows love to all together as a true father. The day in which a visitator in some monastery should have a particular friendship, even though it may be like that between St. Jerome and St. Paula, he will not escape the critical remarks of others, anymore than those two did. And not only will it do harm in that monastery but in all of them, for the devil will at once make it known so as to gain something. Because of our sins the world has gone so astray in this respect that many troubles arise, as is now seen.
46. If the visitator should act in this way, he would be held in less esteem and lose the general love that all the nuns, if he were what he ought to be, would have for him, as they do have now. For they will think that he has set his love on one alone, and it is very advantageous for him to be much loved by all. This does not refer to times in which necessity may require some special attention but to things that are noticeable and excessive.
47. Let him keep in mind that when he enters the house (I mean the monastery, to visit the enclosure), for it is right that he always do so and that he inspect carefully the whole house, as has already been said, that he should be accompanied by his companion and by the prioress and a few other nuns. By no means, even if this takes place in the morning, should he stay to eat in the monastery, even if they urge him to do so. But let him carry out his tasks and then leave immediately. If he wants to talk, it is better that he do so at the grille in the parlor. Even though he could do otherwise in complete goodness and simplicity, it would be a beginning. And perhaps with the passing of time someone might come along to whom it would not be fitting to give so much freedom, and he may want to take more. May it please the Lord not to allow this, but may these things, and everything else always be done in an edifying way as they are now, amen, amen.
48. The visitator should never allow them to go to excess in the meals given him during the days of the visitation but consent only to what is appropriate. If he notices otherwise, let him diligently correct this, for it would not be in keeping with the profession of the visitators, which is that of poverty, nor with that of the nuns, nor would it be of benefit to anyone. The visitators should eat no more than what is sufficient, otherwise they would not be giving appropriate edification to the nuns. As for the present, with regard to this excess, I don't think there could be much of a remedy, because the visitator we have doesn't notice whether the food given him is little or much, good or bad, nor do I know if he is capable of recognizing the difference unless someone very carefully draws his attention to it.
49. He is most cautious to be alone, without a companion, when he has the official interviews, for he does not want it to be known if there is any fault in the nuns. It's something to be admired when the childish doings of the nuns, if there be any, are kept secret. Now, glory to God, little harm is done because the visitator looks upon things as would a father and thus keeps them secret; and God reveals the seriousness of the task to him, for he stands in God's place. Someone who does not stand in God's place will perhaps think that what amounts to nothing is a great matter. Since such a one does not have the responsibility that the visitator has, he takes little care about not speaking of these things, and the reputation of the monastery is lost for no reason. May it please our Lord that the visitators keep these things in mind so as to behave always in this way.
50. It is not fitting for the visitator to show any great love for the prioress or that he gets along well with her, at least not in the presence of all the nuns. For this will make them lose courage, and they will not dare tell him her faults. He should be very aware that they have to know that he will correct whatever has to be corrected. There is no affliction like the one that comes to a soul zealous for God and the order when she becomes anxious at seeing that the order is failing and hopes that the visitator will correct the matter only to find out that everything remains the same. Seeing the little good that it did her to speak up, she turns to God and decides to be quiet from then on even though everything crumbles.
51. The poor nuns are heard no more than once, that is, when they are called for the official interview, whereas the prioresses have much time for excusing faults and giving reasons and setting their own times for speaking with the visitator, and will perhaps suggest that the poor nun who may have said something is over emotional. Even though he may not be told who this nun is, the visitator will more or less understand to whom these prioresses are referring. He is not himself a witness, but things are told to him in such a way that he cannot help believing them. For these reasons, after the visitation, everything stays as it was. If he could be a witness within the community for many days, he would know the truth. The prioresses do not think they are untruthful, but this self love of ours is such that it's a wonder if we ever blame ourselves, nor do we know ourselves.
52. I myself have experienced this many times, and with prioresses who were very, very great servants of God whom I trusted so much that it seemed to me impossible for the facts to be otherwise. Yet once, after spending some days in a house, I was amazed to see something so contrary to what I had been told, in an important matter, that I came to recognize along with almost half the community the partiality involved, and it was the prioress herself who did not realize this as afterward she came to understand. Since the devil does not have many opportunities to tempt the Sisters, I think he tempts the prioresses so that they might have opinions in some matters different from those of the Sisters; and to see how these latter suffer everything is something for which to praise our Lord. Thus it is now my practice not to believe anyone until I have gathered all the information so that I can make the one who has been deceived understand that she has. Without proceeding in this way, it would be difficult to correct a wrong. Nothing of this refers to serious faults, but if we do not proceed with care, the faults could grow worse.
53. I am amazed to see the subtlety of the devil and how he makes each one think she is telling the greatest truth in the world. This is why I have said that complete trust should not be given to the prioress or to any nun in particular but that information should be gathered from a greater number, when dealing with something important, so that an effective remedy may be provided. May our Lord provide such a remedy by always giving us a holy and prudent visitator, for if he possesses these qualities, he will be enlightened by His Majesty so as to do the right thing in all and come to know us. In this way the government will be very good, and souls will grow in perfection for the honor and glory of God.
54. I beg your Paternity, in payment for the mortification I underwent in writing this, that you undergo the same by writing yourself some counsels for visitators. If anything useful has been said here, it can be put into better order; and it will be helpful. Now I am going to begin the final part of the Foundations, and this can be added there; for it will prove very beneficial. Yet, I am afraid that there will be no one else so humble, as the one who ordered me to write, that he will want to benefit from it. But if God wants this, such a one will be unable to do otherwise. If these monasteries are visited in the way that is now customary in the order, there will be little fruit; and there could come more harm than good. In fact, it would be necessary to mention many more things than I have here (for either I don't know them or I don't remember them now). Greater care is necessary only at the beginning. If the nuns understand that the visitation will be carried out in this way, there will be little trouble in governing them.
55. Do your part by writing those counsels I mentioned about the way in which Your Paternity now proceeds in these visitations. Through His mercy and the merits of these Sisters, our Lord will provide the rest since the Sisters' intention is to do what is right for His service in everything and to be taught how to do so. 
