A SATIRICAL CRITIQUE
 
On the Words "Seek Yourself in Me" 
 
1. If obedience had not forced me, I would certainly not have answered, nor, for certain reasons, would I have accepted the role of judge. But none of my reasons is the one the Sisters here give: namely, that my brother is among the contestants and that seemingly affection will distort justice. Indeed, I love all the contestants since each of them has helped me bear my trials. My brother came along at the end of my drinking from the chalice, although he has shared in some part of it and will share in it more with the Lord's help. With the condition my head is in after the many letters and business matters I have been attending to from last night till now, I ask God to give me the grace not to say anything that might merit my being denounced to the Inquisition. But obedience can do all, and thus I will do what Your Excellency commands, whether it turns out good or bad. I have desired to enjoy myself for a while reflecting on the contestants' papers that were sent to me, but I have had no chance to do so.
 
On Francisco de Salcedo's Reply
 
2. It seems that the motto, "Seek yourself in Me" is said by the Spouse of our souls. Well, an indication that Señor Francisco de Salcedo errs is that he stresses so much that God is in all things; the Spouse knows that He is in all things.
3. Señor Francisco also says a great deal about the intellect and union. It is well known that in union the intellect does not work. If it does not work, how can it seek? That which he says quoting David, "I will hear what God speaks within me," pleased me very much, for this peace in the faculties (referred to by the word "people") is to be highly esteemed. But I have no intention of saying anything good about what the contestants have written. Thus, I say that the explanation is off the mark because the motto does not say "let us hear," but "let us seek."
4. And worst of all, if he does not retract what he wrote, I will have to denounce him to the Inquisition which is nearby. For after quoting again and again throughout the entire paper words of St. Paul and the Holy Spirit, he refers, in signing his paper, to the things he wrote as stupidities. Let him correct this at once; if he doesn't he will see what happens!
 
On Julián de Avila's Reply
 
5. He began well, but ended poorly; thus, the honor should not be given to him. They didn't ask him here to explain how the uncreated and the created light are joined but how we seek ourselves in God. Nor did we ask him what a soul feels when it is united with its Creator. And if it is united with Him, how does it have an opinion about whether there is a difference or not? In this union the intellect is, I think, incapable of entering into these disputes. If it were capable, it could easily understand the difference that lies between the Creator and the creature. The contestant also says, "when it is purified." I believe that neither virtues nor purifications are enough here because the union is a supernatural thing, and God gives it to whom He wants. If there is something that disposes for this union, it is love. But I forgive him his errors because he did not go on at such length as did my Father Fray John of the Cross.
 
On Father Fray John of the Cross's Reply
 
6. In his answer he presents very good doctrine for anyone who might want to follow the exercises they make in the Society of Jesus but not for what we have in mind. Seeking God would be very costly if we could not do so until we were dead to the world. The Magdalene was not dead to the world when she found him, nor was the Samaritan woman or the Canaanite woman. Furthermore, he treats a great deal about becoming one with God in union. But when this union comes about and God grants the soul this favor, one would not say that the soul seeks Him but that it has already found Him.
7. God deliver me from people so spiritual that they want to turn everything into perfect contemplation, no matter what. Nonetheless, we are grateful to him for having explained so well what we did not ask. Thus, it is good to speak always of God, for where we do not expect it, benefit will come to us.
 
Señor Lorenzo de Cepeda's Reply
 
8. So, benefit has come to us in Señor Lorenzo de Cepeda's reply. We are very grateful to him for his couplets and response. If he has spoken of more than he understands, we pardon him -- because of the recreation he has given us -- for his little humility in getting into such sublime matters, as he himself says in his answer. And in regard to the good counsel he gives (without having been asked for it), that they practice the prayer of quiet, as if this were in their power: anyone who does this already knows the affliction to which it obliges her.
Please God that since he is near the honey something good will stick to him, for his answer gave me great consolation -- although he was very right in being ashamed of it. In this respect, it is impossible to judge which reply is better, for since without my doing an injustice to any of them by so stating, each of the replies has its faults.
 
Recommendations to Don Alvaro
 
9. Your Excellency should order the contestants to make amends. I, myself, will make amends by not being like my brother in his little humility. All these gentlemen are so divine that they have lost by going beyond what was asked by the question. As I have said, one would not tell the soul that attains this favor of union with God to seek Him, for it already possesses Him.
I kiss Your Excellency's hand many times for the favor you granted me with your letter. So as not to tire you further with these silly things, I am not writing now.
Unworthy servant and subject of Your Excellency,
Teresa of Jesus
