1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your lordship. I am happy that you arrived safely and in good health. But after such a long journey your letter seemed to me short indeed. And then you mention nothing about the purpose of the trip, about how those things which were the reason for your going there turned out. That you are unhappy with yourself is nothing new; nor should you be surprised at suffering some tepidity, considering the hardships of traveling and the impossibility of regulating your time. When your calm returns, your soul will experience it also.
2. My health is now better than it was. If I knew how to complain as well as you do, you would consider your sufferings a trifle. The extremely serious illness lasted two months. And it was of a kind that had repercussions on my interior life so that I felt as though I had no being. Interiorly, I am now better; exteriorly, I have the usual ailments.
3. I am well provided for by you. May our Lord repay you, for what you sent was of benefit not only to me but to other sick sisters as well. Some nuns from Pastrana were quite ill, for the house there was very humid. They are better and are choice souls with whom you would be delighted to speak, especially the prioress.
4. I had already learned of the death of the King of France. It greatly grieves me to see so many troubles and how the devil goes about winning over souls. May God provide a remedy and may our prayers be efficacious. We take great care to beg this of His Majesty, and I beg him to repay you for the concern you show in favoring and caring for our order.
5. Father Provincial (I mean Visitator)has gone so far away that not even by correspondence have I been able to deal with what you ask about making a foundation there of discalced friars. A foundation there would be most beneficial, although the devil for that reason may want to hinder it. The favor you are doing for us is most useful, and it comes at the right moment. The visitators have been reconfirmed in office (and not for a limited time and with more powers than before) and they can authorize the founding of monasteries. I hope then that it will be the Lord's will. For love of God, may you not give up the idea.
6. Soon, I believe, Father Visitator will be close at hand. I will write to him; they tell me he will pass through there. You would do me a favor by speaking with and telling him your opinion about everything. You can speak with him in all openness, for he is very good and deserves that we so speak to him. And through your intervention he may decide to do so. Until you see what he does, I beg you not to give up.
7. Mother Prioress recommends herself to your prayers. All the nuns continue to be solicitous in praying for you, and they will also do so in Medina and wherever they may want to please me. I am sorry about the poor health of our Father Rector. May the Lord grant him health and to you, all the holiness I beg for you, amen.
8. Tell Father Rector that we are praying especially for his return to health and that I am getting along well with Padre Santander, although not with the Franciscan friars. We bought a house just right for us, but it is near theirs and they have entered a lawsuit against us. I don't know how it will all end up.
Your lordship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
