1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. If the prioress of Medina had not informed me that you are well, I would have been feeling sorry for you, thinking that you must be ill since you haven't written for so long. May God be blessed, for I greatly desire your good health. Let those who are are ill bear it cheerfully so that, God willing, it will be beneficial to their souls.
2. You perhaps know that the Lord took to himself Isabel de los Angeles, the one about whom there was all that trouble in Medina, and by such a death that if any nun were to undergo a similar one she would be considered a saint. Certainly she went to be with God, and here I remain, someone who has become useless. Three weeks ago I had a terrible cold along with many other ailments. Now I am better, although not entirely well, and very happy about the news I am writing to Padre Fray Domingo. May they give thanks to the Lord, for we have done this here. May he be praised for everything.
3. Would you send this letter to the prioress of the convent of the Mother of God, for I am enclosing here some medicine that I think helped me. I am distressed about her illness, since I have suffered so much from it in these recent years; that pain is without mercy. But what an idea you had to send me the scorzonera! I hardly ate any, for I had been left with a loathing for anything sweet. Nonetheless, I have greatly prized your care in sending things to the sisters and to Isabel, who already through her courtesy and love seems fully mature.
4. How foolish you are in the excuses you make regarding the hands and all the rest! Until we meet once again, I don't dare tell you about the intention I have in everything. You should know that every day I feel greater freedom, and if I were sure that that person commits no offense against God, I would have no other fears. I have seen many great falls and many dangers in this matter, and I greatly love that soul -- it seems God has given me this concern. And the simpler she is, the more fear I have for her. So, I am happy that she is pleased to be in a safe place, although in this life there is no such thing; nor is it good that we feel safe, for we are at war and surrounded by many enemies.
5. Look, my daughter, when I am without such a serious illness as I have had here, I become very frightened if I feel the least stirring of attraction toward something. This is for you alone, because those who do not understand me will have to be guided according to their own spirit. And indeed, if there is anyone with whom I can allow this stirring, it is with the one to whom I am writing, but however small this may be, a free soul feels it very strongly, and perhaps God wants it to feel this to safeguard the part that is necessary for his service. Oh, my daughter! We are in a world that you will never completely understand, even when you are as old as I. I don't know why I am writing these things without having a trustworthy person to send this letter with; I'll give a good tip.
6. Everything you do for Doña Guiomar is well done, for she is holier than you realize, and has her fill of trials. It's good the other one left in such peace. May it please God that things go better with the other one we received, despite my fear. Those who give up their own home to come to us don't find it easy to adapt to ours, although for now it seems she will do all right. Isabel will write to you about it.
7. I had written as far as this and not found a messenger. Now they tell me there is one and that I should send my letters at once...
