To the Very Illustrious Señor Don Teutonio de Braganza, my lord.
1. Jesus. The grace Of the Holy Spirit be with your lordship. I tell you definitely that if you address your letter to me again with those titles, I won't reply. I don't know why you want to displease me, although I was not so aware of this displeasure until today. Find out from Father Rector how he addresses letters to me, and don't add anything more, because the titles you use are against the spirit of our order. I am glad that he is well, for I was concerned about him. I beg you to give him my best regards.
2. This seems a difficult time of the year for you to be seeking a cure. May it please the Lord that the cure be successful, as I am begging him. May His Majesty bring back your servants in good condition. I am already beseeching him for this. But I would rather you weren't so troubled -- what will this distress do to your health? Oh, if we understood well these truths, few things would trouble us on this earth.
3. I sent the letter at once and wrote to Father Rector telling him how important it was to me that he act quickly. I owe him a great deal. He arranged everything for a house we have already bought, glory to God -- tell Father Rector -- which is a very good one, close to the one where we are living now, which is in a good location. It belongs to a gentleman named Diego de Porres. Padre Acosta will describe it for you; give him my regards and tell him that his novices grow happier each day, and we with them. They ask for your prayers and for those of the nuns. But what bad manners I have to be asking you to deliver these messages. Truly, it's your humility that bears with all this.
4. With regard to the desire you experience to cut short your prayer, pay no attention to it. Instead praise the Lord for the desire you have for prayer and believe that this is what your will wants -- and love to be with God. Melancholy dislikes being treated with severity. It is best to use less severe means and at times relax outdoors where you can walk and see the sky; your prayer will suffer no loss because of this; it's necessary that we bear our weakness and not try to constrain our nature. Everything amounts to seeking God, since it is for him that we search out every kind of means, and the soul must be led gently. In this regard and in everything else, my Father Rector will better discern what is appropriate for you.
5. They are awaiting Father Visitator, for he is on his way. May God reward you for your care in wanting to favor us. I will write to you when I find out where he is. What is important is that you speak with him, for he will pass through there. I am better now; may it please the Lord that you will be so also and that the cure will be of great benefit to you.
Today is 3 July.
Your lordship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
