For my daughter, Madre María Bautista, prioress of the Conception monastery.
1. Jesus be with you, my daughter. Your annoyance made me smile. I assure you it is no pleasure for me to have to give up seeing you. In fact, it would be such a pleasure for me that it seems to me a lack of perfection to try to go there without any compelling reason. Moreover, if Padre Maestro is there, what need is there for me? So, if I am given orders to go there, I will go; if not, I'll have nothing to say. I really think I can be of service wherever I go, even when it seems there is no need. But since you are so prudent, perhaps I'd have nothing more to do than rest. I'm no longer good for much else.
2. With regard to the lay sister, there is nothing to say; the deed is done. But I tell you it is a hard thing to have to see so many lay sisters for every three nuns, as they say. It makes no sense. I believe we will have to get Father Visitator to set a limit as we have for the choir nuns. I don't know what excuse you have for not telling me how sick you are; this grieves me. It's very foolish for you to be worried about perfection when you should be pampering yourself, for your health is important to us. I don't know what mi padre is doing; take note that I will be very annoyed if you do not obey María de la Cruz in this case.
3. I am very discreet in similar things. The truth of the matter is that I have never been very perfect, and now I think I have a greater motive, since I am old and tired; it would frighten you to see me. These days my stomach has been weak, so the nuts you sent arrived at a good time. Although there were still some left from others that had been sent to me, these are very good. You eat the ones that remain for love of me, and give my best regards to the Countess of Osorno. It seems to me that I received only one letter from her, and I wrote one; but I will write again as soon as I can. Today they brought me three packets of letters and yesterday a good number of them. Since my confessor is at the grille and says I should send this messenger boy off quickly, I won't be able to write at length.
4. Oh, how the letter from mi padre saddens me! You should find out at once whether the power the visitator has is in writing. How these canons weary me; and now they want authorization from the prelate so as to oblige us to pay rent on the land. If mi padre is able to give it, it must be in writing and notarized. He should consider how far his powers extend; and if he can give it, let him send it to me at once, for goodness' sake, if he doesn't want the canons to be annoyed with me. We would now be in the house if it were not for a miserable 3,000 maravedis, and perhaps there would be time left over for me to be sent to your monastery. I would like that, even if it were just to see what this nun of yours is like. Tell María de la Cruz that her letter made me happy and that the gift I now ask of her is that she surround your reverence with care.
5. Don't fail to communicate with the rector, for I assure you he may be a greater friend of yours than anyone else may be; indeed, these fathers are helpful. The rector here made the purchase, and he went to the chapter about it, and took care of everything very well. May God likewise take care of you, my daughter, and do not be angry with me, for I have told you why I am not coming to Valladolid. It would be a lie for me to say I don't want to. If I were to come, all the dealings with the nobility and all the commotion would greatly tire me; but I would put up with it all in order to see you.
6. Last night I wrote you a few lines, and now I've written a lot considering the hurry I am in to finish. All the nuns send their regards. May God make you holy. The replies that you make in the letter from mi padre are very amusing; I don't know whom to believe. Don't tire yourself trying to get him write to me; if you tell me how his health is, I will be very satisfied with that.
7. Tell me where he is from because if it is Medina, he will be doing wrong not to pass by this way. This messenger boy came today, July 16, at ten o'clock. I am sending him back at four. Why don't you tell me about the business affairs of Señora Doña María. Give her my best. May God keep you.
Your servant and still ...
Teresa of Jesus
