1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. From the letter of Padre Maestro Fray Domingo, you will see what is happening and how the Lord has arranged matters in such a way that I will be unable to see you. I assure you I deeply regret this, for it is one of the things that would now give me consolation and pleasure. But this disappointment will pass away also, as do all the things of this life; when I think of this, I can bear well anything that displeases me.
2. My best regards to my dear Casilda (for I also regret not being able to see her) and to María de la Cruz. On some other occasion the Lord will so arrange things that more time will be available than there would have been at present. Take care of your health (now you see how important that is and how it saddens me that you are ill); and try to be very holy, for I tell you, holiness will be necessary if you are going to bear the trial you have there. I no longer have the quartan fevers. When the Lord wants me to do something, he then gives me better health.
3. I will be going at the end of this month; and I am still afraid that the nuns here won't be established in their house when I leave. We have agreed to give the chapter six hundred ducats at once; from one of the sisters we have a very good title to an income worth six hundred and thirty. Well, we haven't been able to find anything about this title; no one will accept it or take it as collateral. Pray for this; it would make me very happy not to have to leave the nuns before they are settled in their house. If Señora Doña María had given the money, they would have readily accepted the title, for it is very good and safe. Let me know if this might be possible, or if there is anyone who might accept it or who would give us a loan on good collateral worth more than a thousand. And pray for me, since I have to make such a long trip and in winter.
4. The end of this month, at the latest, I will go to the Incarnation. If you want to send something, write to me, and don't be sad about not seeing me. Perhaps it would make you sadder to see me, I'm so old and worn-out. Give my regards to all. Isabel de San Pablo would very much like to see you. These canons have mortified us all. May God forgive them.
5. Do you know anyone there who could lend me some reales? I don't want them as a donation but only until I am paid what my brother gave me, for they say it has now been collected. To go to the Incarnation without a cent would be a mistake. And here there is nothing available since they have renovations to complete on the house. Whether little or much, try to get something for me.
6. Now they have spoken to me of two nuns with very good dowries who would like to enter here. They would bring more than two thousand ducats each; this could go to pay for the house, which cost four thousand, and to pay the six hundred to the canons, and still more. I am telling you this that you might praise the Lord, for he has granted me a favor; and the two women being received are so good. I have not heard anything about Doña María's business affairs; write to me about them, and send her greetings from me, and let us see if she sends something.
7. Glory to God that my Padre Fray Domingo is well. If by chance Padre Maestro Medina passes through, give him this letter from me for he thinks I am angry with him, according to what Father Provincial says, because of a letter he wrote me. It was a letter deserving thanks rather than anger. He must be wondering also if I know what he said to the other person, although I said nothing to him about it. Our Father Visitator told me she was already a nun and had no more than a thousand ducats for a dowry. Write to me about how she is doing and what Father Visitator says. Well since she is from his order, he will be patient.
8. I wrote to you a short while ago. I don't know whether you received it. It is not right for you to go so long without writing to me, for you know how delighted I am with your letters. May God be with you. It's strange how difficult I am finding it not to be able to see you -- I had still been hopeful.
Today is 11 September.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
