1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. Knowing of your own disappointment seems to console me for having to leave without seeing you. Well, the Lord can arrange things in ways that we don't now foresee, and then we'll have more time together. Certainly, while I have been here, there has been no possibility of doing anything else. A short visit becomes very tiring. One does nothing but visit and one even gives up sleep so as to continue talking -- and idle words are never lacking -- for great is the desire to be with you. But many things I would like to speak to you about cannot be discussed by letter; one of them is the desire not to humiliate Maestro Medina. Believe me, I have my reasons for this and have seen some good results; don't fail, then, to send him the letter, and don't be bothered, even if he seems less friendly; he isn't obliged to us, nor does anything he might say about me matter in the least. Why doesn't he say it directly to me?
2. I want you to know I told Father Provincial that they had worked things out well in taking Samanó from us. Do you know what I realize now? God wants you to be poor but with honor, for he gave you Casilda, who is poor but worth more than all the money in the world. It seems that Father Visitator has become aware of this and wanted to explain things to me, at least he made many excuses for Orellana; so I believe it was Casilda who wanted this. I become angry when I have to speak of this blessed soul.
3. I wrote you a letter after the one that you answered and sent it with a Theatine -- or I don't know with whom -- or better, it was with the one who usually brings messages to the prioress of the Mother of God. In it I told you that we have found the money and that everything is concluded, glory to God. I am in a hurry for us to move before I leave. I don't know if things will be ready. There is little to do, and the house is next to this one. Do not worry. God reward you for your advice. I believe I understood what you crossed out. You should know that Beas is not in Andalusia, but five leagues this side, for I know that I cannot make foundations in Andalusia.
4. The book arrived here, I think, two or three days after the bishop left for Madrid. I have to send it to him there, but I don't know where he is staying. So, I am sending it to you to give to him just as it is when he leaves, but give him this letter addressed to his lordship right away. In it I include a message for Señora Doña María.
5. I am bringing Ana de Jesús as prioress, who is from Plasencia and whom we received at St. Joseph's; she has been living in Salamanca and is there now. I don't at present see anyone else who would be good for your region. The truth is they are saying wonderful things about the holiness and humility of one of the two ladies who are sponsoring the foundation; they are both good. No one should be brought there who is going to be an imperfect example, for from what they say that house will mark the beginning of much good. I mention this for the nun who is with you.
6. Another foundation, please God, will be made soon. But someone who doesn't get along with you would have a bad effect on a new foundation. Nonetheless I would have very much wanted to bring her along. Four of those who came from Pastrana will be going, and still that is not many, because with the two who are now going to enter we would have twenty-two here. The one with 1500 ducats is entering Saturday, and all are amazed by her fervor; I don't know where it will end up. Those nuns who are here, I assure you, are all extremely good. With six going from here, along with the prioress, who is not a native of this town, and the subprioress, a sufficient number of nuns will still be left. There are, in fact, four lay sisters, who are extremely good. Still, one will be forced to transfer more of the nuns, for I understand there are some very good women who would like to enter. You see now how one could hardly fail to make a foundation in Beas! And still another monastery is needed.
7. You think, my daughter, that you were showing me great consideration in advising me not to go. My departure will take place this coming winter, for God has so willed. Considering the harm it caused me, I don't know how I suffered the cold of this region. Don't think I suffered little from it here. It may be that ...