1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor always. It would have been a great consolation for me to find you here, and I would have considered the journey well spent had it given me the opportunity to enjoy your company for a longer time than in Salamanca. I do not deserve this favor from our Lord. May he be blessed forever. This prioress has enjoyed your company fully. After all, she is better than I and most dedicated to serving you.
2. I was most happy that you had my Padre Baltasar Alvarez there for several days to provide you with some relief from so many trials. May the Lord be blessed that you are enjoying better health than usual. Mine is now much better than it has been in recent years, and that is saying a lot for this time of year. I have found souls of such quality in this house that I had to praise the Lord. And although Estefanía certainly is a saint in my opinion, the talent of Casilda and the favors the Lord has granted her after she took the habit have pleased me greatly. May His Majesty lead her forward. For we should have high regard for souls that he takes to himself in so short a time.
3. Estefanía's simplicity in everything except what pertains to God amazes me, for I perceive through her words the wisdom she has in regard to the Truth.
4. Father Provincial has visited this house, and the election has taken place. They have reelected the prioress, and from St. Joseph's in Avila we are going to bring the subprioress elected by them, whose name is Antonia del Espíritu Santo. Señora Doña Guiomar knows her; she is a very good soul.
5. The foundation in Zamora has been set aside for now, and I am going to make the long trip for which I had left before. I have already thought of giving myself the joy of passing through your region so as to pay my respects to you. I haven't received a letter from my Padre Baltasar Alvarez in a long time. Nor have I written to him; certainly not so as to mortify myself, for I never make any progress in this or, it seems, in anything else. But I haven't written because of the torment of having to write so many letters, and when I think of writing one just for my own satisfaction, there is never time. Blessed be God, for we will have security in our eternal enjoyment of him. Here below, certainly, with this flux of separation and change of every kind, we cannot rely much on anything. With this hope for the end, I go through life; they say we do so with many trials, but it doesn't seem so to me.
6. Mother Prioress here is telling me about my "custodian." His affability is as pleasing to me as it is to her. May our Lord make him very holy. I beg you to give him my regards. I often pray to the Lord for him and for Señor Don Juan Antonio as well. Don't forget me in your prayers, for love of the Lord, for I am always in need. We can now be at ease about Doña Guiomar, as you say and she herself confirms. I would love to know something about the successful event so as to make a better judgment and share in your joy. May our Lord in this Christmas season grant your soul all the great joys that I beg of him for you.
7. On this feast of St. Thomas, Padre Fray Domingo preached a sermon here in which he spoke of trials in such terms that I found myself wanting to have many and that the Lord would give them to me in the future. His sermons are for me a sheer joy. They have elected him prior. It is not known whether he will be confirmed. He is so busy that only briefly have I been able to benefit from his presence. But if I were able to see you for as much time, I would be happy. May the Lord bring this about, and may he give you as much health and rest as is necessary to gain that which has no end.
Tomorrow is Christmas Eve.
Your honor's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
