1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. Although I have not written until now, you can be sure that I do not forget you in my poor prayers before our Lord, and learning of your happiness made me happy. May it please our Lord that you will enjoy many years in his service, for I hope in His Majesty that nothing will impede you from this service, even though there may be obstacles. All those things considered good in this miserable life are obstacles. That you spent these past years for God will be of great benefit to you in judging each thing according to its true worth and counting it as something that will soon pass away.
2. Some time ago Señora Isabel de Córdoba spoke to the prioress of this house, who considers her to be very dedicated to God's service. And so I arranged to speak to her. She told me she is a rather close relative of Señor Albornoz's, which is the reason why I would like her to enter here. However since this house is in the process of being adapted and Doña María Mendoza is the foundress, we will need the help of some alms in order to receive her. Since she told me that Señor Albornoz had promised to help her become a nun, I told her that I thought he would be even more willing to do so if she were to enter this house. Indeed, even were I to want a different arrangement, I wouldn't be able to do anything, because of Doña María and also the nuns. Since the number of nuns is small and there are many aspirants, and they are in need, it would be harmful for the nuns not to take in those who can help them. She told me that she has property but that it is of a kind, she is informed, that cannot be sold. When some means are found, even if less than what could be received from others, I will do what I can, for I certainly want to serve you and Señor Albornoz as I ought, for whose prayers I beg. In my prayers, although miserable, I will do what you have asked.
3. May our Lord reward you for the statue. You indeed owe it to me. I beg you to keep it well protected until I ask you for it. That will be when I am more settled in one monastery than I am now; there I will be able to enjoy it. May you do me the favor not to forget me in your prayers. May our Lord grant you all the spiritual blessings that I beg of him, amen.
Today is the feast of the Holy Innocents.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
