1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your lordship always and give you many more good years, as many as I desire, and with the holiness I beg for you. I have been waiting a long time to see your handwriting and find out whether you are in Salamanca, for I didn't know where to write to you. And now I don't know if I'll have the time to write at length, as I desire, since I have a very reliable messenger for this letter. I praise our Lord that you are better. My health has been good, which is a lot for this time of year.
2. May His Majesty repay you for the care with which you undertook all that I had asked of you. Well, it seems to me that our Lady, the Blessed Virgin, has chosen you to be the protector of her order. It is consoling for me to know that she will repay you in more ways than I could think of mentioning in my prayers, although I continue to pray for you.
3. The monastery in Zamora has been set aside for now: first, because this is not a suitable time of year (it's the time for going to a much warmer region); second, because it doesn't seem that the one who was to give us the house responded to all that we expected of him, and he is absent. However, we have not given up. Furthermore, I have also been considering how troublesome it is for a house founded in poverty to have a founder who is not much inclined to helping, especially if he has the right to build the monastery. It seems to me that it would be better to begin in a different way, by buying a house, but this would require more time. The Lord will provide when it pleases him to do so. You have done me a great favor in obtaining the authorization for me at the right time. When a messenger is available you can send it to me, but it is not necessary to hire one immediately.
4. With regard to Torrijos, don't go to any bother about it. In no way does the place appeal to me. I would accept it to comply with your wishes. But for persons of this kind to be received just because we need the dowry would be something unacceptable in these houses, because then we would not be able to send them away at once if they were not suited to our order.
5. I am sorry that the reason for your having undertaken the trip was not realized. Nevertheless, I hope in the Lord that your words will bear much fruit, even though their effect is not seen immediately. May it please the Lord that the business in Rome will go well. I have prayed hard for this, if it be for his service; what I hope is that if it is, he will bring it about, because so many prayers are being offered for that intention.
6. With respect to the countess's monastery, I don't know what to say, for I have been hearing about it for a long time. I tell you I would rather found four monasteries of our nuns than try to convert these blessed souls, however holy, to our manner of living, for within fifteen days from the start our manner of life can be set up so that those who enter do not have to do anything more than what they see is done by the other nuns. I spoke with two of them in Toledo and know that they are doing well in the way of life they have chosen. On the other hand, I certainly don't know how I could receive them under my charge, for I believe they conduct themselves with more rigor and penance than mortification and prayer; I mean in general. Nonetheless, if the Lord so desires, I will find out more, since that is what you seem to want.
7. It was most fortunate that you had the marquis so much on your side, for that is important. May it please the Lord that you receive good news. Regarding the business here, now that you are in the midst of it, I hope in him that all will go well. I will not have to worry any more about letters that displease Padre Olea since it is to you that one ought to write. I have been sorry about it, for much is owed to him and in my opinion my letters got into the hands of others. The prioress of Segovia must not have been on guard, thinking that the matter was not important. It made me happy to know how I can write to you when it is necessary and that when the occasion arises you will speak in favor of my travels. Certainly traveling is one of the things that wearies me in life and one of life's greater trials, and above all when I am judged by others to be doing something bad. I have often thought how much better off I would be remaining at rest and not having the general's command. At other times, when I see how the Lord is served in these houses, everything seems small to me. May His Majesty direct me in doing his will.
8. I tell you there are souls in this house that almost continually, or very frequently, stir me to the praises of God. Although Estefanía is great and, in my opinion, a saint, Sister Casilda de la Concepción amazes me. Certainly I don't find anything in her, exteriorly or interiorly, that would keep her from becoming (with God's assistance) a great saint. What he is doing in her is clearly seen. She is very talented (beyond all possibility for her age) and deeply prayerful, for since she took the habit the Lord has favored her. Her happiness and humility are remarkable; it's a strange thing. Both of them say they will pray for your lordship in a special way.
9. I have not wanted her to write to you: first, because we are being very careful not to let her think we are showing her any special attention (although, indeed, in her simplicity she has little need for this; in many ways she's like another Fray Junípero); second, because I wouldn't want you to pay attention to what we poor women tell you, for you have a good padre who awakens and teaches you and a good God who loves you.
10. With regard to Madrid, I don't know the reason, but even though I see that it would be appropriate to have one of these houses there, a strange resistance wells up in me; it must be a temptation. I still haven't seen a letter from Prior Covarrubias. It would be difficult to make a foundation without permission from the ordinary, because the patent letter I have requires this, and also the Council. But I believe we would have the permission, if this were the only thing in need of our attention. May the Lord advance the project.
11. I will be leaving here after the feast of Epiphany. I am going to Avila along the road passing through Medina, where I don't think I'll stay for more than a day or two; the same goes for Avila, in that I am going on at once to Toledo. I want to finish up this business of Beas. Wherever I am, I will write to you as often as I find someone who will deliver a letter to you. In your charity, please pray for me.
12. May His Majesty repay you for the care you show the sisters there, for you are showing great charity; they are not without their trials. I would be so happy to be there. But, since you are not located along the way to the next foundation, it would be very difficult for me to go there. Unless I were to receive a command, I wouldn't go; nor must I do anything without approval of the authorities. I think that since the nuns are offering him more, he will be satisfied, for the place is very good and there is room for expansion (the site you mention seems to me to be out of the way), and the church is nice. In sum, the location is what matters most. As for the rest, it wouldn't bother me much if anything of what has been constructed were lost. Your lordship, along with Father Rector, should consider the whole matter as a transaction to be made for our Lady, and we will act accordingly. Lest some change be introduced, I would like to see the plan delayed, in one way or another, until I return from Beas. If possible, I will return in April.
13. Your imperfections do not shock me, for I see myself with so many. Here, I have had more time to be alone than I have had in a long while; it has been a great consolation for me. May our Lord give the consolation to your soul that I ask of him, amen. With regard to the one you told me to make a fuss over, I had already come to this awareness, and of all the rest, but both my obligation to be grateful and your great zeal enable me to endure more than with my temperament I could otherwise bear. Nonetheless, I am on my guard! The prioress relies greatly on your prayers. Now that she knows you, she is sorry about how little she understood of the great grace God gave her through your visit.
Today is 2 January.
Your lordship's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
