1. Jesus be with your ladyship. I would have liked to have had more time for this letter, and thinking that I would have it today, I waited until now; for tomorrow, 19 May, I'm leaving. But I have had so much to do that no time is left. I will write through Pablo Hernández. Although I have received no word about him since he left here, I'll inform him of all that you asked me to tell him. I've praised our Lord that your trip went so well. We prayed very much for it here. May His Majesty be pleased that the rest of the trip turn out as well.
2. I am feeling fine and each day I feel better in this town, and so do all the others. None of the sisters is dissatisfied, and every day they please me more. I tell you that of the four who have come, three experience deep prayer, and have many other gifts. They are such that you can be sure that even though I'm going away, nothing that has to do with perfection will be lost, especially considering the persons who will be here with them ... May God keep him here for many years, for with him I have no worry about anything.The parish priest kisses your hands, for he is the type -- I don't know how to say it -- who doesn't send greetings. As you directed me, I gave your greetings to him. We owe him a great deal.
3. I cannot understand why you have not yet sent Maestro Avila what I entrusted to you!Do not delay any longer, for love of the Lord, but send it right away through a messenger -- they tell me it's only a day's journey. To wait for Salazar would be foolish; if he is rector, he wouldn't be able to leave to visit you, and even less go to see Padre Avila. I beg you, if you have not sent it, to do so at once. Indeed, this has distressed me, for it seems that the devil is interfering. And the Reverend Licentiate has been a great temptation, for I had told him to bring it when he went. I believe that the devil will get mad if this saint sees it. I don't know the reason ... I beg you to send it at once and do what I asked of you in Toledo. Realize that it's more important than you think ...
