1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. May God be blessed that your letters arrived here, for I had no small desire for them. In this I see that I love you more than I do other very close relatives of mine. But your letters always seem short to me. I was greatly consoled that you are in good health. May the Lord give you the health I ask of him for you. I am very sorry that you have that disturbance added on to those you have by reason of your office. That illness seems to have become so common that it requires a special remedy. May it please the Lord to provide a suitable one.
2. Oh, Madre, how I have desired that you be with me during these days. You should know that in my opinion they have been the best days of my life, without exaggeration. Our Padre Gracián has been here for over twenty days. I tell you that though I have spoken with him a great deal, I have not yet come to fully grasp the worth of this man. He is without fault in my eyes, and for us better than what we would have asked God for. What you must do now, and all the nuns, is to beseech His Majesty to give him to us for our superior. In this way I could rest from the government of these houses. For I have never seen perfection combined with so much gentleness. May God lead him by the hand and protect him, for in no way would I have wanted to miss seeing him and speaking with him at such length.
3. He has been waiting for Mariano, whose delay made us very glad. Julián de Avila is all enthused about him and so is everyone else. He's a wonderful preacher. I truly believe he has made progress since you saw him, for the great trials he has undergone have benefited him very much. The Lord has so turned things around that I am leaving this coming Monday, with the Lord's help, for Seville. I am writing to Padre Fray Diego in more detail about it.
4. The fact is that this house is in Andalusia, and since Padre Maestro Gracián is provincial of Andalusia, I have discovered that I am his subject without having realized it, and as such I can be given orders by him. A situation came about that when we were ready to go to Caravaca to make a foundation and had been given the license by the Council of Orders, the license turned out to be invalid, and it was decided to go at once to Seville. I would be greatly consoled if I could bring you with me, but I see that for you to leave now would mean the ruin of the house where you are, and there are other drawbacks.
5. I think that before Padre Maestro returns here you will see him, for the nuncio has sent for him, and by the time this letter reaches you he will be in Madrid. While here, I am, and have been, in much better health than usual. How much better would it be to pass the summer with your reverence rather than in the sizzling heat of Seville. Pray for us and tell the sisters to do the same and give them my regards.
6. There will be more messengers in Seville and we will write more often; and so I'll say no more, other than that you give my regards to Father Rector and the licentiate and tell them what has been happening and ask them to pray for me. My regards to all the sisters. May God make you a saint.
Today is the feast of the Ascension.
7. San Jerónimo sends her regards. She is going to Seville with five other very talented nuns, and the one who is going to be prioress is very capable.
Your Reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
8. I don't know why there is such a hurry for Juana Bautista to make profession. Let it go for a while longer, for she is very young. But if you think otherwise and are content with her, then go ahead with it. But it doesn't seem to me a bad thing that you give her a longer probation, for she seems sickly to me.
