1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your lordship. Last week I wrote to you at length in the same vein in two letters, each sent in a different way, because I want the letter to reach you. Yesterday, 17 June, I received from you two letters, which I had eagerly desired, one sent in October, the other in January. Although they were not dated as recently as I would have desired, I was much consoled by them and the knowledge that you are in good health. May our Lord continue to give it to you as all your daughters in these your houses beseech him. Each day in choir we pray for you especially, and in addition all the nuns are concerned about you. Since they know of my love for you and they have no other father, they have great love for you. And this is not surprising, since we have no other good on earth. And since all the nuns are happy, they never cease being grateful to you for having encouraged us in the beginning.
2. I wrote you about the foundation in Beas and how another was being requested in Caravaca, and that the license for the latter contained so many unsuitable requirements that I did not want to proceed with it. Now they have given another license similar to that of Beas, in which the nuns are subject to you, and this will be so, God willing, for all the houses. I also wrote you about the reasons for which I came here to Seville to make a foundation. May our Lord be pleased to bring about my purpose in coming here, which is to rid the discalced friars of the things that provoke you. May God grant me this favor. You should know that before coming to Beas I made many inquiries to make sure it was not Andalusia. In no way would I have otherwise considered coming here, for I do not fare well with these people. And it is true that Beas is not Andalusia, but it is in the province of Andalusia. This I learned only a month after the foundation was made. Since I was here with the nuns, it seemed to me that I should not abandon the monastery. It was one of the reasons for my coming here. But my main desire is the one I wrote about to you, to understand the complicated situation of these fathers, for although they justify their cause (and indeed I don't gather from them anything else than the desire to be your true sons and not displease you), I cannot help but blame them. Now it seems they are beginning to understand that it would have been better for them to have proceeded otherwise so as not to have been troublesome to you. Mariano and I especially argued a great deal, for he is very impetuous. Gracián is like an angel, and were he alone he would have done otherwise. His coming here was by order of Fray Baltasar, who was at the time prior of Pastrana. I tell you that if you knew Gracián you would rejoice to have him as your son, and I know truly that he is, and Mariano is too.
3. This Mariano is a virtuous and penitential man and is known by all for his inventive talents, and you can be sure that he has been moved solely by zeal for God and the good of the order; but as I say, he has gone to extremes and been imprudent. I don't think there is any ambition in him, but he says many things he doesn't mean, and the devil, as you say, stirs up trouble. I have suffered very much from him at times, but since I see that he is virtuous, I pass over it. If you could hear the excuses he makes for himself, you would be satisfied. Today he told me that he wouldn't be at peace until he could prostrate at your feet. I already wrote to you how both of them have asked me to write to you and present their excuses, for they don't dare do so themselves. So I will say nothing here but what seems to me necessary, since I have already written you about it.
4. First you should understand for love of our Lord that I would not give a thing for all the discalced friars together if they dared even so much as to brush against your robes. This is a fact, because to cause you the least displeasure would be like striking me in the pupil of the eye. They have not seen and will not see these letters, although I have told Mariano that I know you will show them mercy if they are obedient. Gracián is not here, for the nuncio sent for him, as I wrote to you, and believe me if I saw they were disobedient, I would not either see them or listen to them; but I couldn't be any more devoted to you than they show themselves to be.
5. I will now give you my opinion and if it amounts to foolishness, please forgive me. With regard to the excommunication, this is what Gracián has now written to Mariano from Madrid: Father Provincial, Fray Angel, told him that he could not stay in the monastery because he had been excommunicated. So he stayed in his father's house. When the nuncio found out, he sent for Padre Fray Angel and scolded him very much saying that it was an affront to say that those who were in Andalusia through his orders were excommunicated and that anyone saying this should be punished. Gracián then went to the monastery, where he is now residing, and he is preaching in the city.
6. Mi padre and lord, this is not a time for excommunications. Gracián has a brother close to the king who serves as his secretary and of whom the king is very fond. And the king from what I have learned might side with the reform. The calced friars say they don't know why you treat such virtuous men in this way, and that they would like to communicate with the contemplative friars and witness their virtue, and that you by this excommunication prevent them from so doing. They say one thing to you, and here they say something else. They go to the archbishop and say they do not dare punish them because they will immediately have recourse to you. They are a strange lot. I see the one group and the other, and our Lord knows that I speak the truth, for I believe that the most obedient are the discalced friars, and they will continue to be so. Over there you don't see what is going on here. I see it and feel responsible for it all, for I truly know of your holiness and how fond you are of virtue. The things of the order are going so badly here, on account of our sins; and now that I have seen what is going on here, the friars in Castile seem to me to be very good. Even since I have been here something very distressing happened -- in broad daylight the police found two friars in a house of ill-fame and publicly brought them to jail. This was handled badly. I am not surprised by human weaknesses, but I would expect that more consideration be given to avoiding scandal. This happened after I wrote to you. Nonetheless, people are saying that it is good they were arrested.
7. Some friars have come to see me. They seem to be good, the prior especially, who is an excellent man. He came that I might show him the patent letters authorizing me to make the foundation. He wanted to have a copy. I asked him not to start a litigation, for he saw that I had the authority to make the foundation. For the last patent letter you sent me in Latin, after the visitators came, gives permission and says that I can make foundations everywhere. And this is the way learned men understand it, for you do not designate any house or kingdom, nor are any limits indicated; rather foundations are to be made everywhere. And it even issues a command, which made me push myself to do more than I was able, for I am old and worn out; but this all seems to me to be nothing, including the fatigue I underwent at the Incarnation. I never have good health, nor do I have any desire for it; but yes, I do have a great desire to depart from this exile, even though God gives me greater favors every day. May he be blessed for everything.
8. With regard to the calced friars who were received by the discalced friars, I have already spoken to Mariano about it. He says that Peñuela took the habit deceitfully, for he went to Pastrana and said that the visitator here, Vargas, had given it to him, but it was found out that he had taken it on his own. For some days they have been trying to send him away, and they will certainly do so. The other friar is no longer with them. The monasteries of the discalced friars were founded by orders of the visitator, Vargas, who has the apostolic authority to do so. He holds that for this region the main tool for reform is to have houses of discalced friars. And so the nuncio sending Fray Antonio de Jesús as visitator gave him the license to be a reformer so that he could found monasteries. But he went about it in a better way, for he made no foundation without asking you. And if Teresa of Jesus had been here, perhaps this would have been carried out more carefully, for if they even considered founding a house without your permission they would have been fiercely opposed by me. And in this matter Fray Pedro Fernández, the visitator in Castile, proceeded well, and I owe him much because he was always careful not to displease you. The visitator here has given so many licenses and faculties to these Fathers, asking them to make use of them, that if you saw the powers they were given you wouldn't think they were so much at fault. Thus they say that they never wanted to accept Fray Gaspar or have his friendship -- who begged them for it -- or others; and the house they took over from the order, they later abandoned. And so they say many things in their defense, from which I see that they have not proceeded with any malice. And when I see the great trials they have undergone and the penance they do -- for I really believe they are servants of God -- it pains me to learn that you disapprove of them.
9. The monasteries were founded by the visitator, and he ordered the friars with grave precepts not to abandon them. And the nuncio gave patent letters of reformer to Gracián and gave him care of the houses of the friars as well, and you say they ought to observe what the visitator commands; and as you know, the pope says the same in the brief that suppresses the faculties of the visitators. I don't know how everything can now be undone. Besides, they tell me there are constitutions in print prescribing that in every province there should be houses of reformed friars. Whether the whole order is reformed or not is not a concern here. These reformed friars are considered to be saints, whatever may be the case. Truly they are good and live with great recollection and practice prayer. Among them are some distinguished persons, and more than twenty have taken courses -- or I don't know what they call them -- some in canon law and others in theology, and they are very talented. And in this house together with those of Granada and La Peñuela they say there are more than seventy friars, or so it seems to me I heard. I don't know what would become of all of them or how it would appear now to everybody, considering the opinion they have of them. Perhaps we would all have to pay. They are highly regarded by the king, and this archbishop says that they are the only real friars. Now to make them leave the reform (since you don't want any reformed friars) -- believe me that even though you had every reason in the world, it wouldn't seem that you did. Well, if you were to remove them from your protection, they wouldn't want this, nor would you be right in doing so, nor would it please our Lord.
I commend you to His Majesty; as a true father, forget the past and remember that you are a servant of the Blessed Virgin and that she would be displeased if you were to forsake those who by the sweat of their brow desire to bring increase to her order. Matters are now such that much careful thought ...
