1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor, my good founder. The muleteer did not arrive until yesterday. Please God the licentiate is sending the parcel with care, for he promised me earnestly that he would do so. I will send word again, for I have been very concerned. In the package I am sending two doubloons for the prioress and telling her to pay the rest. Now we are rich; and indeed we were never in want except when we needed something for your return.
2. The archbishop came here and did all that I requested of him. He is giving us wheat and money and showing much kindness. He wants to give us the house of Belén and the church; I don't know what we will do. Things are moving along nicely; don't be troubled. Tell this to my nuns and my sister, for I do not want to write until I have some good news to send about my brothers. You must not fail to write to us, for you know how much your letters console me.
3. I am well, as are all the sisters and the prioress. It is really hot, but the heat is easier to bear than the sun over the inn at Albino. We have an awning in the courtyard, and that helps a lot. I have already written you that a license like the one for Beas was given for the foundation in Caravaca. Since you have given your word, may you now give us the means by which we can act.
4. I assure you that if the founders do not go to bring the nuns from Segovia, nothing will be done. Until we see how matters turn out in Madrid, we cannot do anything. Our good friend Don Teutonio does very well, and it seems that the negotiations will be successful. Pray to God for him and for me. Give my regards to Mother Prioress, to Tomasina, and to San Francisco.
5. Write to me and tell me how our little rascal is, and the condition of your house, whether it remained standing, and how your housekeeper is. Give my regards to anyone you think you should, and remain with God; I already desire to see you, even were it to cost me another round of trials. May His Majesty make you as holy as I beg him to, amen.
Today is 10 July.
Your honor's unworthy daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
