1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your majesty. While much afflicted and praying to our Lord about the affairs of this holy order of our Lady and considering the great need there is that these initiatives God has taken in its regard not crumble, it occurred to me that the best safeguard for us would be that you realize what giving a solid foundation to this edifice entails; even the calced friars would benefit from the increase in numbers.
2. I have lived among them for 40 years, and, considering everything, I know clearly that if a separate province is not made for the discalced friars -- and soon -- great harm will be done, and I think it will be impossible for them to move ahead. Since this lies in your hands and I see that the Blessed Virgin, our Lady, has chosen you to support and protect her order, I have dared to write and beg you that for the love of our Lord and his glorious Mother you give orders that this separate province be formed. It is so important for the devil to hinder this project that he will raise many objections, without any of them being valid, for only blessings of every kind can come from doing this.
3. It would be most beneficial to us in our situation if you would appoint a discalced padre, named Gracián, whom I have recently come to know, to be in charge of us in our beginnings. Although he is young, I was moved to praise our Lord greatly for what he has given to that soul and for the great works he has done through him for the salvation of many souls. And so I believe that the Lord has chosen this friar to bring many blessings to our order. May our Lord so direct things that you will want to render him this service and issue the necessary commands.
4. I kiss your hands many times for the favor you granted me in regard to the license for founding a monastery in Caravaca. For the love of God I beg you to pardon me, for I recognize that I am being very bold. But in reflecting that the Lord listens to the poor and that you stand in his place, I don't think you will become annoyed.
5. May God give you peace and a long life, as I beg him continually and as is needed by Christendom.
Today 19 July.
Your majesty's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
