1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with you, my friend, and permit you to enjoy the presence of your brothers who, glory to the Lord, are now in Sanlúcar. Today they wrote here to Canon Cueva y Castilla asking him to inform Señor Juan de Ovalle in Alba and me in Avila, where they thought I was, of their arrival. I think they will be overjoyed to find out that I am here. But the joys of this life all come with trials so that we do not become absorbed in them. You should know that the good Jerónimo de Cepeda died like a saint in Nombre de Dios. And Pedro de Ahumada is coming, whose wife has died, according to what they have told me. There is no reason to grieve, for I knew about her life. She had practiced prayer for a long time, and her death was of the kind that left everyone amazed, according to what I was told. Lorenzo, also, lost another boy; he's bringing three children and Teresita. They are well, glory to God. I am writing them today and sending them some little things.
2. I am told they will be here within two or three days. When I think of the joy they will experience in finding me so close, it makes me joyful too. I marvel at the ways of God, that now he brings to me here those who seemed so far away. Today I have written to our Padre Gracián in Madrid, for this letter is going by that same route, which is very secure; you will have the news as soon as possible. Do not weep for him who is in heaven, but give thanks to the Lord that he has brought these others to us.
3. I don't think Señor Juan de Ovalle should start out on his journey until I speak to my brother, because the weather is difficult to bear down here and I must find out if my brother has business that will detain him here. If he will be detained a long while, perhaps you could come along too, and all of you could return together. I will write again soon and in the meantime will tell my brother how I have forestalled Juan de Ovalle from coming, and the weather will then become milder. Give my regards to Señor Juan de Ovalle and let this letter be for him too.
4. You ought also to know that they have given Padre Gracián authority over all the discalced friars and nuns down here and up there as well; no better thing could have happened for us. He is the ideal person as Señor Antonio Gaytán must have told you, whom you must also greet for me, and let this letter be for him too. Regards also to Mother Prioress and all the other nuns. Go and see the lady marchioness for me and tell her I am well and give Señora Doña Mayor the good news about Pedro de Ahumada's return, for it seems to me he was her devoted servant. And give everyone my best. And send this news to Mother Prioress in Salamanca and tell her that the Lord has taken to himself another sister.
5. May His Majesty preserve you for me, my lady. I already told you that I will write at length, for there are reasons for you to be joyful and at peace.	
Today is 12 August.
In this letter that I enclose now for you to send, I put the date as the 10th, but I think it's the 12th, the feast of St. Clare. If Padre Gracián should happen to pass through, show him every kindness and courtesy, as if you were showing them to me in a wonderful way.
Your honor's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
