1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, padre mio. Since you will probably be on your way back here and this letter will not reach you in Madrid, I will not go on at length. Yesterday Father Provincial of "those of the cloth" was here with a master, and then the prior came, and after that another master. The previous day Fray Gaspar Nieto was here. I found that all of them are determined to obey your paternity and help you in suppressing any sinful abuses, as long as there are no extreme solutions taken in regard to other matters. I assured them from what I know of you that you will carry out your office with gentleness, and I explained to them my opinion.
2. I was not unhappy with the reply they made about the Motu. I hope in the Lord that everything will work out very well. Padre Elías feels more encouraged and at peace. I tell you that by beginning without noise and proceeding gently you will be able to accomplish much, but one shouldn't try to accomplish everything in a day. Indeed, it seems to me they are reasonable people. May they be so also up there in Castile! You should know that Macario is so terrible, from what they tell me, that I was deeply afflicted over what concerns his soul. They wrote me saying that now he has to go to Toledo. I have asked myself if he doesn't want to return to his lair because the visitation has already been made there and thus he wouldn't have to meet my Eliseo, and that wouldn't displease me until he becomes more reasonable. Surely, seeing good souls so deceived makes me fear.
3. We called in Doctor Enríquez, who is one of the most learned men in the Society of Jesus, about Teresica. He says that among other things sent to him by the Council was a declaration made by a commission of cardinals on this subject. It went like this: one cannot give the habit to anyone under 12 years of age, but a child can be reared in the monastery itself. Fray Baltasar, the Dominican, also said this. She is already here with her habit, for she looks like the house's little elf. And her father is outside himself with joy, and all the nuns are delighted with her. She has the disposition of an angel, and she is adept at entertaining in recreation, telling her stories about the Indians and her voyage by sea better than I could do. I am happy that she will not be a burden to anyone. Now I want you to see her. God has granted her a great favor and she will know how to please you. I don't think God wants this soul to be reared among the things of this world. I now see the charity you have shown me. For, besides being great in itself, it has been shown in such a way as to remove from me every scruple. And that makes it much greater.
4. It seems now that I have gained a little in charity, for although your absence is so painful for me, I would be pleased, in exchange, if you could help the Incarnation and stay another month to attend to the needs of that house. Eight days would be sufficient, if you leave Fray John there. I know that as things are now, if they see a man who has a good head they soon yield, even though they do a lot of shouting in the beginning. I feel great pity for them, and if the nuncio wanted to do a great work, he could do so in this way. May God provide a remedy, for he can.
5. There is no help for Laurencia from confessors as there was formerly, and since she found relief only in this, now she is without any. With what delicacy our Lord mortifies one, for the confessor that he gives to her has so many obligations that she fears she will enjoy his presence only rarely.
6. It is as hot here now as it is up there in June and even hotter. You have done well to delay. I have written to the good Padilla concerning the Incarnation. Would you please inform my Padre Olea and give him my regards. I have written three letters to him. Would you find out whether he has received them. Oh, Jesus, how little it would take to save so many souls! I am amazed at how I now desire this, for one of the things I hated most was to see you charged with that heavy task. Now it is easier for me to accept this. May God provide and protect you.
Today is 27 September.
Your paternity's unworthy subject and servant,
Teresa of Jesus
