
1. May Jesus be with your ladyship. Today, the feast of the Ascension, the licentiate gave me your letter. When I learned that he had come, I was very anxious, until I read it, for I wondered about its contents. Glory to our Lord that you are doing well, as is also Don Juan, and my lords.
2. As for the rest, don't worry in the least about it. But even though I say this, I myself was disturbed and told him that he had done the wrong thing. He is very confused, in my opinion; indeed, one cannot understand him. On the one hand he desires to serve and says that he loves you very much, which is true, and on the other hand he doesn't know how to behave consistently. He also suffers from a little melancholy, just as Alonso de Cabria. But what contradiction in the things of this world! He could be serving you and doesn't want to; and I, who would enjoy doing so, cannot. Things like these, and other worse things, we as mortals have to endure. We never manage to understand the world, but we don't want to leave it.
3. I'm not surprised that you are distressed. I've already understood that you would have to suffer much, seeing that you have not the kind of temperament that gets along with everyone. But since this is for the service of the Lord, try to bear it and talk it over with this Lord, for he will not leave you alone. That the licentiate has left you will not seem bad to anyone here, but they will feel sorry for you. Try to cast aside your worries. See how much we care about your health. Mine has been very bad these past days. Were it not for all the comfort you have provided for me in this house, it would have been worse. I needed this, for with the sun along the road, the pain I was suffering when you were in Malagón increased to such a point that when I arrived in Toledo they had to bleed me twice. I wasn't able to move in bed because of the pain moving up from my shoulders to the back of my head. The next day I had to undergo a purge. And so I was delayed here eight days as of tomorrow, for I came Friday. I'm leaving in a very weakened condition -- for they drew much blood -- but feeling better. I felt very lonely when I found myself here without you, my friend. May the Lord be served by everything. Everyone has treated me very well, including Reolín. Indeed, I was delighted over how you took such care of me up here, even though you are down there. I pray fervently to the Lord for you. I am well now, although weak.
4. The priest from Malagón accompanied me; it is remarkable how indebted I am to him. Alonso de Cabria does so well under his administrator that he didn't feel like coming with me. He said that the administrator would miss him very much. Since I had such good company and he was tired from the previous trip, I did not press him. You should know that the administrator does a superb job. They say he's beyond all expectations. Alonso de Cabria never finishes praising him, and so, too, the others. Lord Don Hernando is also very happy with him.
5. Carleval has left, and I don't think he'll return ... They say that the Lord has wanted Alonso de Cabria to work for the monastery and that the hospital would pay the expenses. And that is true because Carleval's brother came. I tell you that I am most happy to leave him there. Other than my Padre Pablo, I don't know who I could have left that would match him. We are lucky to have him. He is a man of prayer, with deep experiences of it. He is very happy, but it's necessary to make some further provisions for him. Because I've written to you in Malagón about all this, I'll say no more. Here they tell me great things about this padre I'm speaking of.
6. The sisters are elated. We agreed to bring in a woman who is very much a teatina. The house will provide her meals -- since we must give alms we might as well do it this way -- and she will teach needlework gratis to young girls with the intent of teaching them Christian doctrine and how to serve the Lord, something highly beneficial. Padre Carleval also sent for a young man, and Huerna, as they call him, to assist them. And he and the parish priest will teach the doctrine. I hope in the Lord that this will be of great benefit. Truly, I have come away highly pleased, and may you be so also. Be assured that my absence will take nothing away from the religious observance of the house, for with the spirit of the sisters and with such a confessor, and the priest, who will not neglect them, I hope in God they will advance each day, and I don't doubt that.
7. As for the other chaplain, no one wants to tell him not to say Mass.You might write to him about it, although Padre Pablo is looking for someone to tell him, but I would not want you to forget to do so yourself. The administrator says that he will arrange things so well for him that he will be much better off than previously; but since it is he who must console him, he does not want to be the one to tell him. I beg you not to forget this. They have already given a third of the money to the licentiate; Miranda gave it to him. Send your instructions in writing about who should reimburse Miranda for these payments. May the devil not concoct a scheme that would make us lose a man like this. And he certainly will try, for Miranda will do him as much harm as he possibly can. May you understand the importance of this, and not allow it.
8. I was so busy today that I didn't have time to write; now it's late into the night, and I feel very weak. I brought the lady's saddle that you kept in the fortress -- I hope you won't mind -- and I bought another good one here. I already know that you will be happy that it is a help to me on these journeys since it was there without being used. At least, I'll be traveling with something that is yours. I hope in the Lord that I shall be returning on it; and if not, I will send it to you as soon as you return.
9. I've already written to you in Malagón that I think the devil is trying to prevent Maestro Avila from seeing what I entrusted to you. I wouldn't want him to die before seeing it; that would be too much to bear. Since you are so near him, I beg you that through one of your messengers you send it to him sealed. Write to him and highly recommend it to him, for he wants to read it and will do so as soon as he can. Fray Domingo now wrote to me here that when I arrive in Avila I should send it to him by a private messenger. I'm distressed -- I don't know what to do, for, as I told you, I would be greatly harmed, if they found out. For love of our Lord, please attend to this quickly; realize that if you do, you will be rendering our Lord a service. And as a favor to me, be brave in those strange lands. Recall how our Lady and our Father St. Joseph went about in Egypt.
10. I'm going to go by way of Escalona, for the marchioness is there and she has sent for me. I told her that you had bestowed so many kindnesses on me that I didn't need anything further from her, but that I would stop to see her on the way. It will be for only half a day, if possible, no more. I'm doing this because Fray García, who promised her, urged me to do so, and I won't be going out of my way. Señor Don Hernando and Señora Doña Ana graciously came to see me, and Don Pedro Niño and Señora Doña Margarita as well; and other friends and various people came, some of whom tired me out. Those from your house are very recollected and solitary. Would you write to the señora directress; you now see what you owe her. I did not see her, although she sent me gifts, for I was confined to bed most of the time. I must go to see the señora prioress tomorrow before leaving, for she is insisting that I come to see her.
11. I was not going to speak about the death of my lady the Duchess of Medinaceli in case you had not heard about it. Afterward, I thought that by the time this reaches you, you will know about it. I would not want you to grieve over it, for the Lord has granted a favor to all those who truly loved her -- and granted one to her -- in that he brought her so quickly to himself; with the sickness she had, they would have seen her die a thousand deaths. Such was her ladyship's life that she will live forever, and the hope of seeing her again, you and I together, helps me to live deprived of her presence. I kiss the hands of all my lords; Antonia kisses yours. Give my best regards to Señor Don Juan; I pray for him very much. May His Majesty keep watch over you for me and and guide you always. I'm very tired, and so I'll say no more.
Your unworthy subject and servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
12. They've already given authorization to our "eternal padre." That's the way it is: on the one hand I'm annoyed, and on the other I see that the Lord wants it so and that you suffer trials alone. The padre will surely write to you when he finds a messenger. I will leave this letter with Doña Francisca giving her urgent instructions. If I find someone going that way, I will write from Avila. I forgot to mention that our padre told me of a nun who is very devoted to reading and gifted in ways pleasing to him. She has no more than 200 ducats, but the nuns are so much alone and the needs of a monastery in its beginning so great that I said they should take her. I prefer having her to taking in foolish nuns, and if I could find another like her, I wouldn't take any more. May your ladyship remain with God; I'd rather not bring this to an end, nor do I know how I'm going to bear being so far from someone to whom I'm so indebted and love so much.
