To our Father Visitator.
1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor, padre mio. Oh, if you could see how unsettled and scrupulous I am today! I tell you I am indeed wretched, and what is worse I never mend my ways. Today I told the bishop what Fray Angel had done in Alba. It didn't seem to him to amount to anything, for he asked me what harm could come from his governing these monasteries and in what way he could do us harm. I also told him something about Medina, for since they are not keeping things secret, I didn't believe it mattered. And I added that it would be good for him to know about certain things because, in my opinion, he doesn't know the nature of them. Nevertheless, I feel so scrupulous that if someone doesn't come tomorrow to hear my confession I will not receive Communion. What a nice addition to the other worries I now have concerning you.
2. I told him the rest. He had thought that Padilla had written me about it. I let him think so. He says that all the lords of the world could not make them obey unless jurisdiction were had over them, and that includes the Archbishop of Granada, to whom they are very close. He says that if they tell him something, they do so only to know whether he agrees with them, and that they don't pay any attention to what he tells them; and also that he is under no obligation to try to get them to obey and he doesn't offend anyone by not wanting to get involved, and that there is no reason for them to pay any attention to him. He says that the substance of the matter doesn't lie in such things, but that there are other means that could be appropriately used.
3. At one point I think he said that if there are censures they will obey. He didn't say this clearly, nor should any attention be paid to it, for perhaps this is just my impression. We are praying earnestly for this intention. All things considered, it would be better for them to obey so as to remove the scandal being given in the city, where they must have many supporters. May God give them light.
4. You should hold off, even if they do not obey, from delivering letters of excommunication, so that they may have time to reflect. This is how I see it. You will know better because you are there; but I wouldn't want it to seem that "you have cornered the king."
5. He says that the friar they sent to Madrid went to Rome and did not speak to the nuncio. They must know already that they do not have a good cause.
6. Tell me how you are, for I now see that you are not without worries. Your worries are an affliction to me, and the help you get from me is my wretchedness, as you see. May God make me improve and may he watch over you.
7. Nevertheless, the bishop told me, since I told him about it -- I mean about Fray Angel because he didn't think the other things were very important -- that Fray Angel was free to do so and that I should inform the nuncio who is a higher authority. The more I think about your writing to the general and showing him all the respect you can, the better such an approach seems to be. I don't think it would appear wrong to anyone. It is already enough that things are being done against his will; one can at least write some kind words and pay some attention to him. Consider, mi padre, that we promised obedience to him and that nothing would be lost by doing what I say.
Your paternity's unworthy daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
8. My brother brought the enclosed letter. Tell me how your brother is, you never tell me anything about him; and send someone here tomorrow so to hear my confession. Not for many years have I had as much distress as I've had since this reform began, for here and there I am always saying more than I would like, without saying what I desire to say.
