1. Jesus be with you, my daughter, and may he give you as many good years as I ask of him. I tell you that you make me laugh when you say that on another day you will say what you think about some things. As usual you have advice to give! On the last day of the Christmas feasts, they gave me the letter that came by way of Medina, and before that the other containing one from mi padre. I have found no one through whom I could send a reply. I was overjoyed to receive the news about Señora Doña María, for since the bishop wrote that she was sick with fever, I have been very worried, and so we all have been praying much for her. Tell her this and give her my best regards. May God be blessed who has made her well. My regards also to her daughter and all the others.
2. The letter was written more out of devotion than a desire to fulfill an obligation. I would like to be so disposed toward him that whatever I say will be courteous. It is a strange thing that the affection I have for this other padre of ours causes me no embarrassment as though he were no person. Actually, he doesn't know that I am now writing to you. He is doing well. Oh, what trials we undergo with these reforms! There's no obedience; he has excommunicated them; there is another uproar. I tell you I have had much more suffering than happiness since he has been here; things were going much better before.
3. Were I allowed I would already be there with you, for they have notified me of the mandate of our most Reverend Padre. That is, I must choose a house and remain there permanently and make no more foundations, for I can no longer go out, because of the Council. Clearly this is due to annoyance over my having come down here. I have reached the conclusion that the mandate came at the request of the friars of the cloth. They think it will do me much harm. And it so pleases me that I doubt whether it will be granted. I would like to choose your house for some reasons that cannot be mentioned in a letter, except for one, which is that you and mi padre are there. Father Visitator has not allowed me to leave here because for now he has more authority over me than our most Reverend Father General. I don't know where it will all end up.
4. It would be very good for me now not to be involved in all the turmoil of these reforms. But the Lord does not wish to free me from these kinds of trials; they are most displeasing to me. Our padre tells me I may leave when summer comes. As for what pertains to this house -- I mean his foundation -- there is no longer any need of my presence. As for my health, clearly this region is better for my health and even in a way for my quiet since here they do not have that inflated opinion of me that they do up there. But there are other reasons why I believe it will be better for me to settle down up there; being closer to our other houses is one of them. May our Lord guide matters, for I don't think I have a personal opinion; wherever they send me I will be happy.
5. My brother has returned -- and very sick; the fever, however, is now gone. He didn't meet with success in any of his business affairs, but since his possessions here are now safe, he has more than enough to live on. In the summer he will return to Castile, for this was not the right season. He is delighted with his sister and with Juan de Ovalle -- they seek to please him and show him every courtesy -- and they are delighted with him. He stopped by here for only a moment and so I didn't say anything about that other matter, but I believe it will be necessary to do no more than mention it and he will do it. As for the children's needs, one page will be more than enough.
6. My brother says that, if the page comes here, his mother can feel assured that he will be treated as though she were with him, and if he is capable and virtuous he can study with them at San Gil, and he'll be better off than elsewhere. And as soon as I said that you desire this, Juan de Ovalle said he would take care of the matter, which made me laugh, for whatever he imagines I want, he is pleased to do. And thus I have succeeded in promoting so close a bond of friendship between my brother-in-law, his wife, and my brother that I hope in God they will gain much. My brother will not lose thereby, for he is at peace.
7. Juan de Ovalle has been extremely kind to him; the children never stop praising him. I say this because that boy, if he comes -- I mean here -- in the event that they will not be in Avila by April, there will be no one to teach him anything else but virtue. If I were able to arrange everything, I would be delighted to remove any worry from mi padre, for considering his character, I am amazed at how much he takes this to heart; God must have inspired him since the parents of the boy had no other solution. I would be very sorry if he went to Toledo. I don't know why he would rather stay there than in Madrid. I fear it won't come about. May God ordain whatever will be for his service, which is what is important. I am sorry for you, and my desire to stay in your house has greatly diminished. I indeed believe, as I have said, they will send me to the place where there is most need.
8. With regard to his sister, there is no use speaking about it until our padre goes there, and indeed I am afraid that in trying to free them from one expense we will get them involved in a greater one. Since she was reared there for her whole life, I don't know how she would get along here, and from what I have been half given to understand, she doesn't get along well with her sisters. What I mean is that she must be somewhat bent on having her own way. May it not be a sanctity made of melancholy! Well, our padre will look into everything and until then, nothing should be said.
9. By now you will have received my letter in which I told you that I sent a nun from here as prioress for Caravaca. The nun from your house accepted it with much joy, and so the prioress of Malagón, where she has remained, writes me that she is happy. I tell you she must be a good soul. She wrote me wanting to know about you, and she speaks much about what she owes you and speaks of you with much love. The house was founded before Christmas, as far as I know; I haven't heard anything.
10. I believe it will be good if you say nothing about the page to mi padre until I speak to my brother. Write and tell me how old he is and if he knows how to read, because it's necessary that he go with them to school. My best regards to María de la Cruz and to all, and to Dorotea. And why don't you say anything about how the chaplain is? Look after him, for he is a good man. And how is the arrangement of the room working out and do you find it satisfactory both in winter and summer? As usual, despite what you say about the subprioress, you are not more submissive.O Jesus, how we do not know ourselves! May His Majesty give us light and watch over you for me.
11. With regard to matters concerning the Incarnation, you can write to Isabel de la Cruz, for I can help much more from down here than from up there, and this I am doing. And I hope in God that he will give life to the pope, the king, the nuncio, and our padre for one or two years, and everything will be settled. If any of them should die we would be lost, since our most Reverend Father General is of the present mind; yet God would resolve the matter in another way. Now I am thinking of writing to him and offer to serve him more so than before, for I am very fond of him and owe him much. It grieves me greatly to see what he is doing because of bad information. Everyone here sends you their best regards.
12. The situation here is not suited to composing songs. Do you think things are going so well? Pray much for our padre, for a serious person told the archbishop today that perhaps they will kill him. They are in a state that arouses pity, and even more when one sees the offenses committed against God in this region on the part of nuns and friars. May His Majesty provide a remedy and free me from every offense, for up there I don't know ... But if God is to make some use of me, my life matters little; I would like to have many lives.
Tomorrow is New Year's Eve.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
13. The weather is such here that I would have to go in search were I to want cold weather at night. May the Lord be praised for this. At least for my health, it is a good region, and nonetheless I do not desire to be here. My brother's becoming a friar has gone nowhere nor will it.
