1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your lordship, amen. After I arrived here in Seville, I wrote to you three or four times, and I did not write any more because the fathers who returned from the chapter told me that you would not be in Rome, that you had gone to visit the Mantuans.
 May God be blessed that the chapter is over. In those letters I also gave you an account of the monasteries that were founded this year, which are three: Beas, Caravaca, and this one here. You have in them subjects who are great servants of God. Two of the houses were founded with an income; the one in this city was founded in poverty. We still do not have our own house; but I hope in the Lord that we will. Because I am certain that one of these letters must have reached you, I am not going to give a detailed account of everything in this one.
2. I also mentioned how different speaking with these discalced Fathers -- I mean Padre Maestro Gracián and Mariano -- is from what one would imagine through what I heard in Castile. Certainly they are your true sons, and I would dare say that, substantially, none of those who insist they are your true sons would surpass them. Since they have asked me to be an intermediary so that you may look favorably toward them again, for they did not dare write to you, I begged you in those letters as earnestly as I could, and so I beg you now, for the love of our Lord, that you do me this favor and believe my words. There is no reason for me to say anything but the complete truth, aside from the fact that I would consider it an offense against God not to speak the truth. And even if it were not an offense against God, I would consider it a great evil and betrayal with respect to a father I so love.
3. When we stand before the judgment throne, you will see what you owe your true daughter Teresa of Jesus. This alone consoles me in these matters; for I well know there must be some who say the contrary. And so, in every way that I can I will try to make all understand, I mean all those who are not prejudiced, that I am your true daughter and will continue to be this as long as I live.
4. I have already written to you about the commission Padre Gracián received from the nuncio and how he was called to Madrid. You must know by now how he was again given the task of visitator to the discalced friars and nuns and to the province of Andalusia. I know very definitely that with regard to the latter, he tried to refuse in every way he could -- although this is not being mentioned, it is true -- and that his brother, the secretary, was also opposed because nothing would come of it but a great trial.
5. But if these Fathers would have listened to me after it had become a fact, everything would have been done quietly and as though among brothers. And I did all I could to foster this attitude. For, apart from the fact of it being the correct attitude, these Fathers have helped us in every way since we have been here. And, as I wrote to you, I find gifted and learned persons here of the kind that I would love to have in our province of Castile.
6. I am always fond of making a virtue out of necessity, as they say, and so I would have wished that when they decided to resist they would have considered whether or not they would be able to win out. On the other hand, I am not surprised that they are tired of so many visitations and innovations that, for our sins, have been taking place for a good number of years. May it please the Lord that we know how to profit from this, since His Majesty is waking us up. Yet, since the visitator is from the same order, there is less humiliation. And I hope in God that if you show favor to this padre in such a way that he understands that he is in your good graces, everything will proceed very well. He is writing to you and has a great desire for what I said and not to displease you, for he considers himself your obedient son.
7. What I again want to ask you, for love of our Lord and his glorious Mother (whom you so love, and this padre does also since he entered the order through his devotion to her) is that you answer him and do so with gentleness and leave aside the things of the past, even though he may have been somewhat at fault, and receive him as your son and subject, for he truly is. And poor Mariano is also, although sometimes it is not evident. I am not surprised that what he wrote to you differed from what he intended, since he doesn't know how to express himself. He confesses in fact that he never intended either in word or in deed to offend you. Since the devil gains so much when things are interpreted according to his own wishes, he must have pushed these Fathers to conduct their affairs badly without their meaning to do so.
8. But note, it is characteristic of sons to make mistakes and of fathers to forgive and overlook faults. For the love of our Lord, I beg you to do me this favor. See how this would be appropriate for many reasons that perhaps you would not understand over there as I do here. And even though we women are not good for giving counsel, we sometimes hit the mark. I don't know what harm could come of it and, as I say, there can be many advantages. And I don't see that any harm could come from your being receptive to those who would very willingly cast themselves at your feet, if you were present, for God never fails to forgive. And no harm can come from your making it known that you are pleased that the reform be carried out by one of your subjects and sons, and, as though in exchange for this, you are happy to forgive him.
9. Would that there were many to whom this task could be entrusted! But apparently there are none with the talents of this padre (for I am certain that if you were to see him you would agree). Why don't you show that you are pleased to have him as your subject and let everyone understand that this reform, if carried out correctly, is being done with your approval and with your advice and counsel? And were others to understand that you are pleased with this work of reform, everything would proceed more smoothly. There are many more things I would like to say in this regard, but I think it will be more to the point for me to beg our Lord to give you understanding of what is appropriate for you to do; because for some time now you have paid no attention to my words. I am fully certain that if I am mistaken in my words, my will does not intend to be.
10. Padre Fray Antonio de Jesús is here, for he couldn't get out of coming. Nonetheless, he also has begun to defend himself as have the other Fathers. He is writing to you. Perhaps he will be more fortunate than I in getting you to believe us, as would be fitting, with regard to all I am saying. May our Lord provide, as he can, in keeping with our need.
11. I learned of the general chapter act in which I am ordered to remain in one house and not go out. Father Provincial, Fray Angel, had sent it here to Padre Ulloa with orders that he notify me.
 He thought that it would cause me much grief, which was the intention of these Fathers in procuring it, so it was kept from me. It must have been little less than a month ago that I was able to get them to give it to me, for I had heard of it from elsewhere.
12. I assure you that from what I understand of myself, it would have been a great gift and happiness for me if you had sent it to me with a letter to let me know that you were feeling sorry about the great trials I was undergoing in making these foundations -- for I am not much for suffering -- and that as a reward you were ordering me to rest. For even taking into consideration the way it did come, it consoled me greatly to know I could live in peace.
13. Since I have such great love for you, I could not help, sensitive as I am, feeling hurt that the order should come as though to someone very disobedient and in such a way that Padre Fray Angel could publish it in Madrid before I knew anything about it, as though they were using force with me. And so he wrote me that I could have recourse to the papal chamber, as though that would bring me great relief. Indeed, even if the work of making foundations, a task you had given me, had not cost me such great trials, it wouldn't enter my mind not to obey, nor would God allow me to find any happiness in going against your will. For I can truthfully say -- and our Lord knows this -- that if I experienced some relief in the trials and anxieties and afflictions and slander that I have suffered, it was in the thought that I was doing your will and making you happy. And now, too, it will bring me relief to do what you command.
14. I wanted to carry out the orders at once. It was close to Christmas and since the journey is so long, they wouldn't allow me, knowing that you would not want to put my health at risk. So, I am still here, but with the intention of remaining in this house only until after the winter passes. I have little in common with the people of Andalusia. And what I beseech you is that you don't forget to write to me wherever I may be. Since I will no longer have business to attend to -- which will certainly bring me great happiness -- I am afraid you will forget me, although I will not give you the chance to do so. Even though it may tire you, I will not fail to write to you for the sake of my own peace of mind.
15. In these parts they have never understood, nor do they understand, the Council or Motu proprio as having taken away from prelates the authority to allow nuns to go outside to do things for the good of the order, for many reason for doing so may occur. I do not say this in regard to myself, but so that you will not have any scruple about the past, for I am not good for anything (and not only am I ready to stay in one house, for this will give me some relief and rest, but even stay in a prison cell if that would make you happy -- and gladly for the rest of my life). For even though I had the patent letters, I never went anywhere to make a foundation -- for otherwise, clearly, I could not have gone -- without a written order or license from the prelate. And so Padre Fray Angel gave it to me for Beas and Caravaca, and Padre Gracián for here, for he had the same commission from the nuncio then that he has now, but he wasn't using it. Yet, Padre Fray Angel said that I was an apostate and excommunicated.
 May God pardon him for you are a witness to how I strove that you would always be on good terms with him and to make him happy -- I mean in matters that would not be displeasing to God -- but he has never managed to act kindly toward me.
16. It would be much more to his advantage if he were as ill-disposed to Valdemoro. Being prior in Avila, the latter removed the discalced friars from the Incarnation causing great scandal to the people, and he has so greatly disturbed the nuns -- the spirit of the house had been something to praise God for -- that it is heart-breaking to see. I have received word that to excuse him they are blaming themselves. Now the discalced friars have returned and, according to what has been written to me, the nuncio has given orders that none of the friars of the observance be confessor to the nuns there.
17. The grief of those nuns has deeply afflicted me, for they are given no more than bread and, on the other hand, so much disturbance that it rouses me to great pity. May God provide a remedy for everything, and may he preserve you for many years to come. Today they told me that the general of the Dominicans is coming here. If only God would give me the grace of providing an occasion for you to come, although, on the other hand, I would regret the fatigue it would cost you. And so my rest will have to wait for that eternity that has no end, where you will see what you owe me. Please God through his mercy that I will be worthy of it.
18. I commend myself to the prayers of the reverend fathers who are your companions. These subjects and daughters of yours ask for your blessing, and I ask the same for myself.
