1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity. Do not think, mi padre, that you can make things perfect with one stroke. What fruit can you bring about in the two or three days you stay in those small houses that Padre Fray Antonio could not? Hardly will you have left when they will return to their former ways, and you by doing this are exposing yourself to a thousand dangers.
2. Señora Doña Juana is convinced that you do what I ask of you. Please God that in the present matter this will be so. She spent three days here, although I was not able to enjoy her presence in the measure that I would have liked, for she had many other visitors, especially the canon. They became great friends. I assure you, the qualities God has given her are among the best. I have come across few instances in my lifetime of talent and character like hers, or I don't think any at all. She has a simplicity and openness that put me in seventh heaven. In these she greatly surpasses her son. It would be the greatest consolation to me if I lived in a place where I could converse with her frequently. We got along so well that one might have said we had known each other all our lives.
3. She says she was delighted with her stay here. God willed that she find lodging with a widow who lives alone with her maids. It was very much to her liking and close by, which she considered very fortunate. Her meals were prepared and brought to her from here; and it was providential that you gave me orders to keep money so as not to have to be dependent on what the monastery could provide, which would have been a painful thing for me. It was a small matter, but I was able to do things the way I like.
4. It amused me when you told me to open the grille and lift my veil for her. It seems you do not know me; I would have wanted to open the depths of my heart to her. Señora Doña Juana, her daughter, stayed with her until the last day. She seemed charming to me, and I am sorry to see her among those young girls at the school, because the truth of the matter is that, from what she says, she finds it more difficult there than she would here. I would willingly give her the habit along with that little angel of mine, her sister, who is as pretty and plump as can be. Señora Doña Juana couldn't get over her surprise on seeing her. Periquito, her brother, for all his intelligence, couldn't recognize her when he came. She is my whole recreation here. I spoke much about her to Señora Doña Juana. On the last day it seems she was somewhat touched, according to what Ana de Zurita told me. She told her that she had spent the night thinking about this and was close to making a decision, but that she wanted to reflect on it more. May God bring it about. Pray for this, for since she resembles you very much, I would love to have her with me.
5. Since Señora Doña Juana observed the happiness and behavior of all the nuns, she has decided to make the effort to send Señora Doña María to Valladolid soon, and I think she has repented for having dissuaded Señora Doña Adriana from going there. She was very satisfied, from what I could tell, and I don't think she is deceitful.
6. Yesterday she wrote me a highly complimentary letter, saying that while she was here she did not experience her pain and sadness. Her letter got torn up along with some others. I can't count the letters that have arrived these past two days. They'll make me lose my mind. I felt bad that the letter was destroyed, for I wanted to send it to you. The day she left she said that the tertian fever had left Señor Lucas Gracián and that he is now well. Oh, what a nice person Tomás Gracián is. I like him very much. He also came here. Today I wrote to him telling him that you were doing well.
7. I was thinking today about which of us two loved you more. I find that Señora Doña Juana has a husband and other children to love, and poor Laurencia has nothing else on earth but this padre. May God be pleased to watch over him for her, amen, for I am consoling her as much as I can. She tells me that Joseph has assured her again, and in this way she keeps going, although with trials and without any relief from them.
8. Let's come now to the chapter. The members have returned extremely happy, and I am very happy about all the good that was accomplished, glory to God! As usual, this time, too, you have not been spared great praise. It all comes from his hand; and also, perhaps, the prayers do much good, as you say. I was extremely pleased about the appointment of a zelator for the various houses. That is a very good step and will prove beneficial. I insisted with him that he stress manual labor, for it is infinitely important. I said I would write to you about it because the chapter did not deal with this. I told him that it was in the constitutions and the rule and that he could do nothing better than to see to their observance. I was also happy -- so much so that I couldn't believe it -- that they expelled the ones they did from the order. To be able to do this is very important.
9. I was also very happy over the steps taken to strive in every way possible to become a separate province by approaching our Father General, for it is an unbearable battle to have to go about with the displeasure of one's major superior. If this costs money, God will provide it; let it be given to the two companions. And for love of God, your paternity should make every effort that they not delay in going. Don't take this as a secondary matter, for it is the most important. And if that prior of La Peñuela knows Father General well, it would be a good idea for him to accompany Padre Mariano. And if they cannot obtain any concessions, let them speak with the pope. But the first course of action is the best, and now is the propitious time. And in view of Methuselah's health, I don't know why we are waiting, which is like having nothing to stand on and then one day discovering that we are lost.
10. You should know that a priest friend of mine -- who discusses matters of his soul with me -- told me today that he is very certain that Gilberto will die soon, and he even mentioned that it could be this year. He said that he had experienced such presentiments about others and that these were never wrong. This is something possible, although one shouldn't pay attention to such experiences. But since it is not impossible, it would be good for you to keep in mind, for the sake of our concerns, that this could happen. So deal with the visitation matters as with things of short duration. All that Fray Pedro Fernández wanted to have carried out at the Incarnation, he did through the hand of Fray Angel -- and he observed from afar. Not for this reason did he cease to be the visitator or fail to do his duty. I always remember how that provincial treated you when you were staying in their house, and so I wouldn't want you to show any ingratitude, if you can avoid it. They complain that you are being directed by Padre Evangelista. Also in this regard, you should be careful, for we are not so perfect as to be unable to feel dislike for some and affection for others.
11. The prioress of Malagón is somewhat better, glory to God, although that means little, according to what the doctors say. I was amazed that you wanted to leave the decision to me about going to Malagón when it is out of the question for many reasons. One of them is that there would be no sense to it, for I do not have enough health to care for the sick, nor that much charity. As for the house, I mean the work on it, I am accomplishing much more here. Since Antonio Ruiz is there, the nuns have nothing to worry about. And even if my presence were greatly needed, this would not be a good time to go as you can see.
12. Another good thing is that you are not giving me orders to go, nor do you think that it would be good for me if I did, and that you are telling me I can do what seems to me best. That would show great perfection on my part, to think that my opinion would be better than yours! When they told me that the prioress had lost her senses and speech -- insisting on the seriousness of the situation -- I sent word that the direction of the house should be taken up by Juana Bautista, who in my opinion was the best choice. It's so much trouble for me to have to transfer nuns such a distance that I avoid doing so as long as I can. I wrote to the prioress so that she would know my opinion, if she were in any condition to read it, but said that if she thought otherwise she could choose whomever she wanted, for that would be in accord with the order's rule.
13. She did not want Juana Bautista and chose Beatriz de Jesús, who she said is much better. Perhaps she may be, but I don't think so. Nor did she want Isabel de Jesús to be novice mistress. They have so many novices that I am worried. Isabel has experience and has not formed bad novices; she may not be astute, but she is a good nun. The licentiate didn't think Isabel should be chosen either, but Beatriz now has ended up with everything and she is exhausted. If she can't manage, there are others to choose from, and for this house that would be better, in my opinion, than bringing in a nun from elsewhere while God still preserves the life of the prioress. I have clearly seen that you did everything so as to please her. But if I should be tempted to go, it would be difficult. Hardly do I think of going somewhere, it seems to me, than everybody knows about it. As for me, I can tell you that in a way I would be happy to spend some days there.
14. Doña Luisa was here yesterday, and I think I got her to agree to give 4,000 ducats this year, for she only had to give 2,000. The construction manager says that if she gives this amount, he will build the place for the nuns by a year from this Christmas; that is, they will be able to live there by then. So it seems that God guides you well, for my stay here will be most beneficial, and will even bring me happiness. I experience much happiness when I don't have to see relatives as prioress in Avila.
15. My temperament is strange, for when I saw that in leaving me here you weren't concerned that I had no desire to stay, I felt the greatest happiness. And I felt free about expressing my desires and opinions when I saw that you pay no attention to what I think.
16. I told Isabel's novice mistress to write to you. In case you don't remember her name, the enclosed letter is for you. Oh, how pretty she is becoming. How plump she's getting and charming. May God make her a saint and watch over your paternity much more than me. Pardon me for making this so long and be patient since you are down there and I am up here. I am well. Today is the vigil of the feast of St. Matthew. Regarding that matter about Rome, I beg you to hurry; don't wait until summer, for the weather is good now, and believe me that this is what is fitting for us.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
17. Don't kill yourself over those nuns, for according to what Methuselah says, your office will be of short duration. And the night owls think this also, for they say he told Peralta to hurry so as to be back here within two months, and they say that certainly he will take full charge. Oh, if only this matter were concluded! How welcome that would be, and may His Majesty deliver us from all this confusion.
