For mi padre, Doctor Fray Mariano de San Benito, Carmelite, Madrid.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence and reward you for the good news you have given me about the health of our good padre, Señor Licentiate Padilla. Please God it will continue for many years. So now you are calling me reverend and señora! God forgive you, for this makes it seem that you and I have turned into calced Carmelites. I was amused by the friendship of the reverend padre who came to ask you for a favor. He tried it with me in Avila -- and God grant him better health! -- although there are twelve hours in a day. Perhaps he has changed.
2. You should know that I've been told -- and it is so -- that Tostado has sent a messenger here with letters for the provincial, who wants to send a friar there. It seems to me there is a lot of coming and going. I am sorry about the departure of Fray Buenaventura, not to mention the good he was accomplishing. If the foolish things being done against him succeed, everyone will deduce that God is favoring him. And you do not tell me what is being done about that suppressed monastery. O Jesus, how many things you allow!
3. I wish we already had that little house; the rest can be done afterward, God willing. I wouldn't even want to see the walls of the house of those who have so little love for us. I have already said that a letter from the Señor Nuncio would set everything straight. Mi padre, let us hurry to do all that we can. And if you are able, take up the matter of a separate province, for we don't know what lies in store for us. And nothing would be lost by so doing, but much would be gained. For goodness' sake, if you receive any news about our padre, write to me about it, for I am worried. My greetings to Señor Licentiate Padilla and to Padre Fray Baltasar. The prioress sends hers to them as well, and to you. I was happy to see that that revered padre is there. May God be with you always.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
