To The Most Honorable Señor Francisco de Salcedo.
My lord,
1. Jesus be with you. Glory to God that after six or eight letters dealing with business matters that couldn't be avoided, I have a little time to rest from them by writing these lines to let you know I receive much consolation from your letters. Do not think that writing to me is time lost, for now and then I need this, provided that you don't keep telling me that you are old, which leaves me in total dismay. As though there were some security in being young! May God let you remain here until I die; afterward, so as not to be there without you, I will beg the Lord to bring you there quickly.
2. Would you speak to this padre, I beg you, and help him in this matter, for although he is small, I know that he is great in the eyes of God. Certainly we will miss him very much here, for he is wise, and just right for our way of life. I believe our Lord has called him for this task. There's not a friar who does not speak well of him, for he had been living a life of great penance, even though he is young. It seems the Lord is watching over him carefully, for although in trying to get everything settled we met with a number of troubles -- and I myself must have caused trouble at times by becoming annoyed with him -- we never saw an imperfection in him. He's courageous, but since he is alone, he needs all that our Lord gives him for taking this work so much to heart. He will tell you how we are getting along here.
3. The generous sum of six ducats seemed to be no small thing, but I would give much more to see you. Surely you are worth a higher price than I; who is going to value a poor lowly nun? In addition, you are to be prized more in that you can give aloja, wafer cookies, radishes, and lettuce, that you have an orchard and take the place of your servant -- I know about it -- to bring us apples. The aloja here, they say, is very good, but since I don't have Francisco de Salcedo here, we don't know what it tastes like nor do we have the means of knowing. I'm telling Antonia to write you, for I'm not able to go on at length. Remain with God. I kiss the hands of Señora Doña Mencía and Señora Ospedal.
4. May it please the Lord that the improved health of that married gentleman continue. You shouldn't be so incredulous, for prayer can do all things, and the kinship he has with you will do a lot. Here, we will help with our widow's mite. May the Lord bring it about as he can. Indeed, I think the illness of his wife is more incurable. The Lord can cure it all. I beg you, tell Maridíaz, and the Flemish woman, and Doña María de Avila -- for I would very much want to write her, and surely I don't forget her -- when you see them, to recommend me and this monastery to God. May His Majesty keep your honor many years for me, amen. For, in passing, it might be said that this year could go by without my seeing you again, the Princess of Eboli being in such a hurry.
Your lordship's true and unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
5. I beg again as an alms of you that you speak to this padre and counsel him on what you think about his mode of life. The spirit the Lord has given him has greatly encouraged me, and his virtue, among so many troubles, makes me think we have a good beginning. His prayer is deep and he has good intelligence. May the Lord lead him on.
