1. Time will bring you to lose a little of your simplicity, which I certainly understand to be that of a saint. But since the devil does not want everyone to be a saint, those who are wretched and malicious like myself would want to remove the occasions of sin. I can express and have much love for you for many reasons, but this cannot be so for all the nuns, nor will all superiors be like mi padre with whom one can speak so familiarly. God has entrusted this treasure to you, but you mustn't think that all the others will care for it the way you do. I tell you truly I fear much more the fact that men can rob you than that demons can. And what the nuns see me say and do (because I know whom I'm addressing and my age allows it), they think they can do also, and they will be right. But this does not mean that you should stop loving them, rather that you should love them still more.
2. And the truth of it is that, despite my wretchedness, from the time I began to have daughters like these I have gone about with so much circumspection and vigilance, keeping a watch on how the devil might tempt them through me that, glory to God, I don't think there are any particularly serious things they have been able to note (for His Majesty has helped me). I confess that I have striven to hide my imperfections from them -- although there are so many they must have seen a good number -- as well as my love and concern for Paul. I often point out to them how necessary he is for the order and that I am under an obligation -- as if I could act otherwise if I didn't have this reason.
3. But how tiresome I am! May it not prove a burden to mi padre to have to hear these things, for you and I are weighed down with a very heavy load and we have to render an account to God and to the world. And since you understand the love with which I say this, you can pardon me and do me the favor I've asked of you: not to read in public the letters I write to you. Remember that people interpret things differently and that superiors should never be so open about some matters. It may come to pass that I am writing about a third party or about myself and that it would not be well for such matters to be known. There is a great difference for me between speaking of certain things with you and speaking of them with others, even my own sister. Just as I would not want anyone to hear me when I speak with God, or hinder me from being alone with him, so it is with Paul ...
