1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with you. If you would believe what I tell you once in a while, we could avoid a lot of trouble. Did I not insist the other day in a letter that you not have yourself bled anymore! I don't know what nonsense has got into you, even though the doctor does give his consent. Your illness has been very distressing to me since the affliction is in your head. Now, about Catalina, you must pray for her, and not because she wants to go there, where I know she is very much loved. I tell you, this woman is a great person. Please God she will not have to pay dearly for all this affection she has for you. This is what passed through my mind, and I'm telling you so that you will repent.
2. I've received all your letters. They arrive in good condition this way. There is no need for you to send money to cover the portage, for I can take care of it with what my brother gives me. I owe him so much in every way. Our Father Visitator is well, for a letter from him arrived two days ago. He is solicitous about writing me, and up to the present he is getting along well with those people. But he carries out his office with much discretion and gentleness. Many days have now gone by since that matter with the Franciscans, and they haven't killed their visitator.
3. The news regarding Bishop Quiroga is true, and we are delighted because our padre has an excellent rapport with him. Now the bishop and the nuncio are very sick. Pray for them, for we would miss them very much, and the bishop would be a loss to the entire kingdom. Pray also for Don Juan of Austria, for he went to Flanders disguised as the valet of a Fleming.
4. Oh, how pleased you made me by telling me of the health of Padre Fray Pedro Fernández. I had been disturbed, for I had known about his illness but not about his recovery. I tell you, he does not resemble your friend by ingratitude, for with all he has to do, he takes care to write to me. And in everything, he thinks he's indebted to me, although in this regard your friend is much more indebted to me. Know that the care this friend takes of you will last until he finds someone else who pleases him. Be sure of this, no matter how much you take for granted.
5. If God hadn't held me back, I would have done what you wanted to do some time ago. God doesn't allow me to do this, from which I see that he of whom you speak is God's servant. So it is necessary to love him, for he deserves it, and along with him, all the other servants of God there are on earth. If we think we're worth more than they, we're being really foolish. But this does not mean we should resemble him, but rather that we must always be grateful for the good that is done for us. So, forget about all these niceties and don't fail to write to him, but strive little by little to have an inner freedom, of which, glory to God, I now possess a good deal; but you are not as free as you say. Blessed may he be who is always a true friend when we desire his friendship.
6. The letter will be delivered to Luis de Cepeda. I have already written you that his father also died and of how much we prayed here for his father during the illness. Send me the account you say you have prepared for my brother (for I gave him the one Señora Doña María de Mendoza gave me), and send me the other accounts also with all your recollections. And, when you are up to it, prepare a report on Estefanía like the one you sent to Avila, for that was very well done. The handwriting should be good, so that I don't have to get someone here to make a copy. And don't entrust it to Juliana, for, because of exaggeration, the silly and nonsensical things she said in the report about Beatriz de la Encarnación were unbearable. But when you are well, write down what you know, for the provincial has ordered this to be done.
7. I am well, glory to God. There's no way of persuading you, when you need a purgative, to take that syrup, the "King of the Medes." It has given me new life, and there's no harm it can cause you. Do not send the accounts by ordinary mail, or even think about doing so, but with the muleteer, even though this means a delay, for nothing would get here.
8. Concerning what you say about your interior life, the greater the disturbance the less attention you should pay to it, for it clearly proceeds from a weak imagination and bad humor; and since the devil sees this, he adds his bit. But have no fear, for St. Paul says that God will not permit us to be tempted beyond what we can bear. And even though it may seem that you give consent, it's not so; rather, you will benefit from all of this. Continue with your cure, for love of God, and try to eat well, and don't remain alone thinking about nothing. Seek some diversion inasmuch as you can and however possible. I would like to be there, for there's much I would talk about for your entertainment.
9. How is it that you didn't write me about the trials of Don Francisco? I would have written him, for I owe him a great deal. When you see the Countess of Osorno, give her my regards, and regards also to my María de la Cruz, Casilda, and Dorotea, and to the subprioress and her sister. I don't know what should be done about that blind novice. I tell you it's a heavy hardship.
10. Indeed, Prádanos is a good friend. You do well to speak with him, even though they are now going to change the superior. If only they'd send Padre Domeneque back! How much I would like that for you. Write soon about how you are, and remain with God. As for the prioress, she has been sorry about your illness. We are all praying to His Majesty for you. When you write to Fray Domingo always give him my regards; and let me know how he is.
Today is All Souls day.
I remain yours,
Teresa of Jesus
