1. Jesus be with your paternity. Now see the tiresome decrees made by Padre Juan de Jesús. It seems to me he is just repeating what's in your constitutions. I don't know for what purpose. This is what my nuns fear, that some burdensome prelates will come along and crush them. Laying on heavy burdens accomplishes nothing. It's strange how visitators think they haven't made a visitation unless they have set down some decrees. If the friars were not to have recreation on the days in which communion is received, then those who say Mass daily would never have recreation. And if priests don't observe such a rule, why should the other poor friars have to?
2. He writes me that since he had never visited that house, all these things were necessary, and that must be so. In some matters he must have had to intervene. Still, I felt worn out just from reading the decrees. What would happen if I were obliged to observe them? Believe me, our rule doesn't bear up under rigorous people, for it is rigorous enough.
3. Salazar is going to Granada, something the archbishop arranged, who is a great friend of his. He has a great desire that a house of our nuns be founded there, and this would not displease me. Even if I didn't go, it could be done. But first I would want the foundation to be acceptable to Cyril, for I don't know if visitators can give permission for the foundation of houses of nuns as they can for friars. If only the Franciscans don't get there ahead of us as they did in Burgos.
4. You ought to know that Santelmo is badly annoyed with me on account of the nun who has now left, but in conscience I couldn't have done otherwise, nor could you have done anything. Everything possible was done in this matter, and when there is question of pleasing God, the world can crumble. I have no regrets, nor should you. We'll never gain anything good from going against the will of our Good. I assure you that even if she had been my Paul's sister -- which would be the highest recommendation -- I could not have done any more. He just refused to listen to reason. He is annoyed with me because I believe my nuns speak the truth. He thinks the prioress is partial and that his candidate was falsely accused about everything. He has arranged for her to enter a monastery in Talavera with others from Madrid, and so he sent for her.
5. God deliver us from having a need for creatures. And may it please him to help us see clearly without any other need than for him. San Telmo says that I have done this because I don't need him now, and that he has been told I am a crafty one. Notice that I needed him most when we were considering sending his candidate away, and how truly misunderstood I was. May it please the Lord that I understand how to do his will always. Amen.
Today is 19 November.
Your unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
