1. Jesús. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your paternity, and may he keep you, mi padre, for many years, amen. I tell you that if God hadn't given me understanding that all the good we do comes from his hand and how little we ourselves can do, it wouldn't be unusual for me to experience a bit of vainglory over all that you are doing. May God's name be ever blessed and praised forever, amen. The things that are happening are stupefying enough, but that you proceed with so much peace is what makes me marvel, and that you turn enemies into friends and make them the authors or, to put it better, the executors of your plans.
2. The choice of Padre Evangelista pleased me. For goodness' sake give him my regards and thank Paul for the recreation he afforded us with his poems and the letter for Teresa. I rejoiced that the matter concerning the cicadas was not true and that the butterflies went there. I hope in God that this will prove to have been very beneficial and I believe the number is sufficient for that place. They are the objects of much envy, for when it comes to suffering we all have great desires; may God help us to put our desires into practice.
3. It would have been a real trial had the spirit of that house been a bad one. Now you can see how much the spiritual people in that region are to be pitied. May God be blessed that you were there during the uproar. What would the poor things have done! Nonetheless, they are fortunate since they are already benefiting from something, and what you write about the archbishop's visitator I consider very important. This house will do nothing but great good, for it has cost us dearly. I don't think Paul is suffering anything in comparison with the fear he suffered on account of the angels.
4. I was very much amused to learn about your begging, but you haven't ever told me who your companion is. You say you were sending the letter to Peralta in the packets, but it didn't come. They did not give me the one that you addressed to Padre Mariano, nor has he written a word to me. It's been a long time since he has written me. He sent me a letter from you today without writing. Perhaps he has kept the one I'm speaking of and Garciálvarez's document. He also sent me one or two letters by way of Segovia. I thought they were from you, although the addresses were not in your handwriting. Afterward I saw that they were not from you. The news around here is that Methuselah has much improved, glory to God, and no longer has a fever. It's strange the way I feel, for nothing that happens can trouble me, so deeply rooted is the feeling of certitude about a successful outcome.
5. On the feast of the Presentation, I received two letters from you; afterward a very brief one that came with another for Doña Luisa de la Cerda, who is more than just a little happy over it! In one of these packets the permission for Casilda came. I've already sent it on.
6. Oh, how eagerly, according to what I'm told, would Angela have prepared food for Paul when he experienced that hunger of which he speaks! I don't know why he looks for more trials than God gives him by going about begging. It seems he has seven souls so that when one life comes to an end, there will be another. Scold him, for goodness' sake, and thank him on my behalf for the favor he shows me in taking so much care to write to me. May it be for the love of God.
Teresa of Jesus
What is happening now, although I believe Esperanza will have mentioned it ...
