1. Jesus be with your honor, and may he repay you for the consolation you give me in so many ways. Indeed, there are things in the writing you sent that I have never heard or even thought of. May God be blessed for everything. That there be matter for confession in these things or in the fact of your coming here seems to me to arise from a scruple rather than virtue. You displease me very much for this. But you have to have some fault, since, after all, you are a son of Adam.
2. I was greatly consoled that my father St. Joseph will arrive so soon and that1. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter, and give you his intense love this Christmas so that you do not feel your illness so much. May God be blessed, for many will think they are having a very good Christmas with health and happiness and well-being, whereas on the day when they will have to render an account to God they will see that it was badly spent. You need not be disturbed about such matters, for in that bed you are gaining glory upon glory.
2. It is a good thing that you are not worse in such trying weather. Do not be surprised by your weakness, for you have been sick a long time. The cough must have come from some cold draft you may have been in, but without knowing for certain the cause, nothing can be prescribed for you here. It's better if the doctors there prescribe for you.
3. About the nun, I have no aspirant to send you, but in seeing your need I wondered if it wouldn't be better to send one from Medina who they assure me is very good. But, since you say that you can get along with those 100 ducats, it's better not to take anyone until you have a house.
4. I'm amazed that they order you to get up in weather like this. For goodness' sake don't do so -- it would be enough to kill you -- until the weather gets better; but not now, for it's even dangerous for those who are big and healthy ...
5. My greetings to ... and that I am letting her know that there is quite an uproar because Sister Casilda is renouncing her possessions. Don Pedro has written me about this. Doctor Velázquez, who is my confessor, says that they cannot make her go against her will. Well, I have left it to Don Pedro's conscience. I don't know where it will all end up. They want to give her 500 ducats and the cost of her veil -- what an expense that is, so great that it has to be mentioned! -- but they do not want to give it now. Surely, this angel owes but little to her mother. On account of the child's distress, which is great, I would like to see the whole matter concluded. And so I wrote to her asking her not to worry even if they don't give her anything.
6. Beatriz writes that she is better now and suffers no more. Since she sees you want her to be well, she thinks she is well even though she may be sick. I've never seen anything like it, as the poor licentiate says ... I am fine. May it please the Lord that you, my daughter, will be well very soon, amen.
7. Beatriz's trousseau according to the list they sent me amounts to practically nothing. I told them to send it by way of Antonio Ruiz at least the blankets and two sheets and some drapery. I think the cost to do so will amount to more than the things are worth. I will pay for it here if you want. Her sister sent to ask for the mattresses and some other little things ...
 you are so devoted to him. The sisters there will be very happy, for they are like strangers in that place and far from anyone who could console them, although I certainly believe that the true consolation is really close to them. In charity, would you take the measurements of the length and width, and this has to be done at once so that the box can be made tomorrow, for they cannot do so Tuesday since it is a feast day, and on Wednesday morning the wagons leave.
3. It's no small thing for me to have to give up so soon the statue of our Lady. I will feel extremely lonely without it. So, in charity, you can provide a remedy for me by sending the one you are going to give me for Christmas. With all our hearts we will beseech the Lord to give Christmas gifts to you and those gentlemen. Give them my respects and may you remain with God.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
4. The three foundresses will make their profession on New Year's Day, and it will be a consolation for them to have the statues there.
