1. Jesus be with your reverence. Oh, my daughter, what a letter you sent me, filled with good news, as regards both your health and the nun who will render us so good a service as to pay for the house! Please God there will be no mishap. I pray for this urgently, for it would give me the greatest happiness to see you freed from the burden of debt. If she enters, help her along, for the love of God; she truly deserves it. I really wish I had more time so that I could write a long letter; but I wrote today to Avila and Madrid and elsewhere, and my head is in a terrible condition. I received your letters, the ones you mentioned. One that I wrote to Father Prior of Las Cuevas -- which I sent unsealed so that you could read it -- must have got lost, for you say nothing about it. You must all feel lonely without our good padre there.
2. Tell Señor Garciálvarez that he must be a father now more than ever. I am delighted that his relative has entered. Give her my best regards, and also send this letter to the nuns in Paterna (for I have so great a desire to write to them) so that they will know that I am well and was delighted with their letter and delighted to know that Margarita is going there and also a confessor. They shouldn't be surprised that those nuns do not become like us at once. To think they should would be foolish. Nor should they place so much stress on silence and other things that in themselves are not sinful. By taking away from people something they are accustomed to, you make them sin more. Time is needed so that God may do his work and you not exasperate them. We are praying very much for them here.
3. It is wrong for the prioress to allow them to insult her, unless she can do so by pretending that she didn't understand what was said. Those who govern must know that, save for matters concerning the enclosure, God will do the rest, and they should proceed with great gentleness. May he be with you, my daughter, and watch over you and all the other nuns. Give them my regards.
4. Tell the prioress of Paterna to send me news of how they are. In all her letters she pays no more attention to San Jerónimo (who may be the more efficient of the two) than if she were not there. And tell San Jerónimo to write to me; and both of them to put their trust in God so that they may succeed in everything, and that they shouldn't think they can do anything of themselves.
5. I am well. Mother Prioress of Malagón is as usual. Let me know if our padre took money for the trip, for it was my understanding that he didn't. Send him this letter, please, and do so with great caution taking care that it get to him quickly; but the carrier should be trustworthy. I am truly sorry about the departure of the public attorney. It seems God wants us to know that it is he alone who does everything. Give my regards to the Carmelite prior and to good Fray Gregorio, and tell him to write me.
Today is 17 January. I am
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
6. I liked your Matins. I believe it must have gone well, for the Lord always helps at the time of greatest need. Don't fail to write me, even though our padre isn't there. I won't write so often, but that's because of the cost of the postage.
