For my daughter, Mother Prioress of St. Joseph's in Seville.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. And I tell you that up here I could still add to the praises you bestow on our padre, and with the greatest sincerity. I don't know what it is that induces me to love you so much. I am now beginning to believe that you are reciprocating. May it please the Lord that this will be shown by our praying earnestly for each other.
2. Yesterday, the feast of the Conversion of St. Paul, the muleteer brought me your letters and money and all the rest. Everything was so beautifully wrapped that it was a pleasure to behold, and so everything arrived safely. May God reward you for the happiness you gave me because of what you sent to our padre's mother. No one thus far has done so much, and he is very happy. Why shouldn't I love you so greatly, for you do nothing but please me? I only coveted somewhat the agnusdei, for I had been desiring these past days something to give to the administrator, who doesn't fail to come to my help whenever I need something. He has worked especially hard for the house in Malagón, and will continue to do so. That house is undergoing such a dry spell that, given my nature, it is a great trial for me. In every house there is some little portion of the cross, but I do not regret it.
3. God has granted me such a favor by alleviating the worries of your house and allowing everything to go so well that I have nothing to complain about. It is especially good that you give me hope that you can pay part of the debt, for when I think of your having to pay more than a ducat a day, I cannot help but be troubled. Such disturbance is beneficial because it makes me pray that God will lift the burden from you. May it please His Majesty at least to lighten it, amen.
4. To return to the agnusdei, because of the one to whom it was destined, I did not want to fail to send it, for it gave value to the rest, which looked nice. Here we took some of the balsam, since Isabelita told us they have a lot of it there, and three brinquinillos so that you don't think my Isabelita is the daughter of a bad mother who will give her nothing; those that are being sent are enough. May God reward you, my daughter, amen, amen, amen. And for the potatoes, which arrived in good condition right at the very time when I have no desire to eat! And the oranges gladdened the hearts of some of the sick nuns, although they are not seriously sick. Everything else is very good, and the sweets as well, and there are many.
5. Doña Luisa was here today, and I gave her some. Had I known that she would prize them so highly, I would have sent them to her in your name, for she is made happy by any little thing at all, but it seems better to us not to give much to these ladies. My brother sent me the best box from those you sent him. I am glad that this didn't cost you anything. You can, then, when you think it is appropriate, ask for something for some person you consider worthy, or if you are given a gift, say that you are accepting it for so and so or some specific person; then you would not be giving away what belongs to the monastery.
6. I had not sent the prioress of Malagón any of the sweets my brother sent me because of the high fever she has; they would kill her. And I wouldn't want you to send her any gift that would worsen her fever. But it would be very good if you sent her other things, such as sweet oranges, for she suffers from nausea, and other items suitable for a sick person. I would like so much to bring her here. Now I am hoping to get water from Loja. I have written to our padre to let us know if he stops there, for I will send someone to get it. I think she is being well cared for, for I insist very much on that. What she most prefers now are mantequillas.
7. I would like to respond at length to your letters, for I have received them all, but the muleteer is leaving tomorrow and you can see all the correspondence I am including for our padre. I apologize for the cost of the portage, but this is something so important that it is necessary to have a good carrier. And you, too, should get Padre Fray Gregorio and ask him for me to send the letters quickly with some trustworthy person -- Diego if he is there -- for out of love for me he will do so gladly. If the person is not trustworthy or going immediately, they shouldn't be given to anyone, for I wouldn't dare send some of the letters unless the carrier were very safe.
8. The orders sent me by the general while I was down there have also been seen here. They forbid not only me but all the nuns to go out, so that the nuns cannot leave their monasteries to be prioresses or for any other reason. And if our padre's commission were to end, everything would be destroyed. For although we are subject to the discalced friars, being so is not enough unless as commissary our padre declares we have this permission. His statement is sufficient for me and for the nuns, but at any moment something could happen to change this.
9. So, make every effort, for goodness' sake. And whoever is the carrier should wait for our padre to prepare the statement, which won't take much time, and bring it back to you. And if you can't send it with the muleteer, paying well for the portage, don't send it. Tell our padre that I told you to have him send it to you. It's strange how stupid we have been. The administrator has examined it, who is a great legal scholar, and Doctor Velázquez. They both say this can be done and are sending instructions. May God do what is most suited for his service, for they are ordering me to get this in a hurry, and so I am doing it.
10. It's lucky you didn't give the money to Antonio Ruiz, for the manager who was to bring it is here. I had already told the one who is in charge of paying the portage for me to give the twenty reales so that we don't get in debt over trifles; but he will do what you say. We also took a little of the courbaril resin. I had wanted to write and ask you to send some, for some pastilles may be made from it with rose-colored sugar that are very helpful for my rheumatism. There is still a lot left over. Next Tuesday they will deliver the package with care.
11. I was especially delighted to learn that you are well. Be careful that you don't start acting as though you are healthy. We don't want to begin worrying again, for you made me go through some anxious moments. My regards to the subprioress, to all the nuns, and to everyone. I will write soon through the mail carrier. No more now except that Casilda has made her profession.
May God keep you, my daughter, and make you holy, amen.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
Greetings to Garciálvarez and his cousin, and to all.
