1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, mi padre, amen. For goodness' sake, don't use señora in the title when addressing me, for that's not our way of speaking. What a great pity those stabbings in Andalusia are.
2. Our padre isn't writing anything to me except that he is well, although at times he does suffer some ailments. The waters from the spring at Antequera will cure him. I just don't understand this business of Padre Fray Buenaventura, because I think you wrote to me that they had taken away his authority. If they have taken it away, how, unless they have given it back to him, can he send to have friars arrested? God has granted us a great favor in that our padre has carried out matters with so much peace. And as long as no one stops him short, he will bring everything to a better conclusion, which is what I hope for in the Lord.
3. Padre, don't become distressed over the arrival of Tostado. Leave matters to our Lord, for this is his work and he will draw out much good from it all. It doesn't cause me any grief, because I see that all our affairs seem to be going upstream and they are going better than those that seem to be flowing with the current, because God is showing his power. What seems hardest is that he is coming just when the nuncio is departing, for the commission of our padre will then come to an end.
4. You should know that the nuncio sent for Tostado some days ago, and the friars here, those of the cloth, are surprised because of his delay in coming. I think they will send a messenger if they haven't done so already. They say their mistake lay in not having sent someone whose sole mission would have been to summon him.
5. All right, let him come, and we will see how this venture will end up. If the king remains as steadfast as he was, and the others, too, his coming will have little impact. And should they change their opinion, this will be for the best; don't worry, mi padre. My counsel is that you should remain in the house that they gave you there; give up looking for property. I can't bear those negotiations and setting aside the certain for the doubtful, for time is followed by more time.
6. Remain where you are for now. I believe it would have been better to have made a foundation for nuns than to negotiate for something for the friars better than what they would construct for themselves; have no doubt about it. I already saw the truth of this in Madrid during the eight days that I was there. Let's not get overwhelmed, for these are serious matters and, as you say, the best thing about them is the persecution. And since nothing is achieved without it, all is going well for now.
7. I am delighted that our padre is not in Seville and, as you say, it would be better if he came closer to us up here, although there is a house of discalced friars in Granada where he could stay. But still, if his commission ends and Padre Tostado keeps his power, it would be good if they did not meet. Those who are here say only that Tostado must go directly to Madrid; that is the command the nuncio gave. They say that it is true he was given the royal ordinance, but that the royal council has reconsidered the matter and changed their opinion.
8. Yesterday Pedro González told me that he saw in a letter from Rome that another nuncio has been named. I believe, padre, that he will come thoroughly forewarned against us; but if God is with us, etc.
9. Padre Maestro Fray Pedro Fernández is here. He has come to see me. I believe a month will go by before he goes to Madrid. Be sure, padre, he will not go against the acts of the apostolic visitators. As for Padre Tostado, serve and obey him; but not in something contrary to the acts, for that would destroy us. Therefore if he comes, however gentle you may be, you should remain firm on this point. This won't matter to our Father General as long as we are under obedience to him. If the acts are observed -- as they will be -- it would be life-giving to us if Tostado took over the reform. May it do him much good! I am afraid, mi padre, that God will not do us this favor! May it please His Majesty to guide things for His greater service, and may whatever comes come.
10. I am sending a request for Juan Díaz to do me the favor of attending to a business matter in Caravaca. You will see what it is because I am sending the report and the letters of recommendation for the Bishop of Cartagena. I don't think it would be a bad idea for you to beseech the duchess for me to send a servant to recommend the matter to him also. For it is said that he is very devoted to her ladyship. I don't know how to express in words the affliction those sisters are going through, and they are so far away. Seeing the occupations ... Don't fail to help them for the love of God.
May His Majesty be with you always, amen.
Today is 6 February. My regards to Father Prior.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
