1. Jesus be with your reverence. Since I was waiting for a letter from the Carmelite prior, I mean an answer from him, I had not sent a mail carrier. And that was fortunate because the one who is carrying this is Señor Diego Pérez. I praised the Lord to see him free. It really seems that he is an authentic servant of God, for our Lord has tried him in suffering. It's a pity to see the condition the world is in.
2. If a letter from Señora Doña Luisa de la Cerda is necessary for your negotiations, you should know that she is not here but in Paracuellos, near Madrid, three leagues from there. This padre pleased me very much; he must have a great talent for every kind of good.
3. The Carmelite prior's decision, according to what Maestro Córdoba said, in the presence of Señor Diego Pérez, is that until he sees the permission for the foundation of the monastery given in the handwriting of our most Reverend Father General he will do everything he can to oppose it. He says that there is no reformer and that the nuncio can do nothing except by means of one. And he is so convinced of this and that the discalced friars are acting against obedience, since they are not obliged to follow the visitators but their general, that it would have been useless for me to have said anything to the contrary. Diego Pérez could not even persuade him. He says also that the king, having seen how the discalced friars are living in disobedience, has given the command that his ordinance coming through the royal council be issued.
4. I tell you that it is something for which to praise God, the way those Fathers carry on their affairs. I was quick to believe their assertion that they had a new brief, but it is the one from the general chapter given a year and a half ago. Maestro Córdoba saw it today. I think he is a cousin of Padre Fray Alonso Hernández, and I don't know why -- since he has it there -- he doesn't inform them how matters stand.
5. If the prior's response to his lordship should arrive before this letter goes out, I'll send it along also; otherwise, let me know if I should send it to the archdeacon. But until the king's orders are nullified, it is useless; once they are, quick action will be necessary. Let us avoid tiring others. Padre Diego Pérez could tell his lordship the prior's answer since he has heard it. I don't think the archdeacon could answer so quickly, and it's better that his lordship be informed. Please God your health is better, for I am very worried about you.
Today is 18 February.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
