1. Jesus be with your reverence, my padre. I don't know why you neglected to write to me through this muleteer and acknowledge that you have received the answer from the Council which I sent you last Thursday. I would like to know how you can be in that city without living with the friars, I mean in the Carmelite monastery, since the nuncio has insisted so much on this. It's only right that we not displease him in anything; it would not be fitting for us to do so. I would very much like to speak with you because there are things that can be spoken but not written.
2. Up until now with the expectation of having a house there, any arrangement seemed acceptable. But believe me, padre, so prolonged a stay, and with four discalced friars, doesn't seem right to anyone, and it attracts attention, and not just the attention of the friars of the cloth, which we don't have to be concerned about. But I would not want us to provide the slightest occasion for criticism by doing anything that would give the appearance of non-compliance. Pay no attention to the fact that the marquis tells you the nuncio would not be displeased.
3. I also beg you to speak with great caution, whether you have any complaints about the nuncio or not. Because of your frankness -- with which I am familiar -- I fear that you are careless about this; please God nothing will reach his ears. You must realize that all the devils are waging war against us, and that it is necessary to look for support only from God. This we do by obeying and suffering, and then he will take over.
4. I would think it very fitting that when Passion Sunday comes you and the other discalced friars go to your monastery in Pastrana or Alcalá, for it isn't the appropriate time for carrying on business. If there is some business to be attended to, it's enough that the licentiate Padilla be there to take care of it as he has always been. Days such as these are not the time for religious to be outside their monasteries. It wouldn't look good to anyone, much less to the nuncio who is so retiring. It would be very consoling to me if you did this. Think it over carefully and realize that it is the appropriate thing to do. Otherwise you will have to live with the friars of the cloth, which I think would be worse.
5. Be very careful not to talk with the archbishop. Once he is informed, it isn't fitting for you to insist even if you have the opportunity to speak with him. He has accepted responsibility for the matter. After this, the best way to carry on the business is to be silent and speak with God.
6. This letter has been written after much reflection and with more than one reason, all of which I cannot go into. But I see that it is very advisable for you to do what I am asking. No harm could come to us from your doing so and a great deal if you do not do so. When we see that something is right, there is no reason to delay. Our Lord gives us many opportunities in which to merit, and I am aware of those you have had and do have, for I am amazed by how you have controlled your temper. But now prudence is necessary and God is giving it to you as he did in that matter with the bishop. May he be blessed forever, for in the end he will favor his work.
7. They say that Tostado is coming by way of Andalusia. God be with him whatever may happen. I think it will be better to have to contend with him than with the one we have had to contend with up until now. May God give us light, and may he watch over you and those Fathers who are with you. I am a little better.
Today is 15 March.
Yours,
Teresa of Jesus
