For Mother Prioress of San José of the Carmel in Seville.
1. Jesus be with your reverence, my daughter. I have written you a letter through the mail carrier. I believe it will arrive sooner than this one. Now I am sending off the crucifixes, which are no better or worse than the others. They only cost nine reales apiece, and I even think a cuartillo less. I have been told that they couldn't have been made for anything lower than a ducat. You will have to get a turner to make the holes. Since they brought them during the Easter feastdays I wasn't able to have this done, so I'm sending them as they are. It's more convenient. The crosses are made from ebony wood. They are not expensive, so I would have liked to send you even more.
2. I long for news about good Bernarda. I have already written to you of how God took a sister from this house to himself, which caused me deep grief.
3. In regard to your speaking to Garciálvarez about your prayer, there is no reason to stop, for there is nothing in it that needs correcting. And this is true also for those who proceed as you do. It would seem strange for you to desist, especially since this would not conform to what our Father Visitator requests. Give him my best regards.
4. Oh, how I would like to send my little book to the prior of Las Cuevas, who has asked for it. We owe him so much that I would like to please him in this way. And it wouldn't harm Garciálvarez to learn something about our procedure, especially in prayer. If the book were there I would give it to the prior, for we have no way of compensating this saint in the way he deserves, other than by doing what he asks of us. Perhaps this will be possible one day. It has been such a busy day for me that I cannot go on at greater length.
5. I have already written informing you that I received what the muleteer brought, although it didn't arrive in good condition. This is not a good time to send such things, because of the heat. Don't send me anything but the orange-flower water, for the flask broke. And if you can find any, send some crystalized orange blossoms, dry, and sprinkled with sugar, for I will pay for their cost. Otherwise send the sweets. But I prefer the orange blossoms, whatever the price, even if only a small quantity.
6. I've already told you that one of our nuns has gone to heaven, and about the trials we have had, and how delighted I am with the entrance of Nicolao. I greatly appreciate your solicitude for the nuns in Paterna, for they write to me about it. I think it was God's providence that someone with your charity and talents remained down there for the good of us all. I hope that these good qualities he will greatly increase in you.
7. I don't think I will be able to write to Father Prior of Las Cuevas. I'll do so another day. Don't let him know about these letters. My regards to all the nuns, especially Gabriela, to whom I would like to write. Oh, how I long to see that widow inside the monastery and professed. May God bring this about, and watch over you, amen. I also sent you a letter of Doña Luisa's. It's the last day of Easter.
Your unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
8. You should know that the brother of San Francisco was dismissed from the Society of Jesus, for which I was sorry. I didn't dare write to her lest I cause her grief, but perhaps it would be better for her to learn of it from us. You will see from the enclosed page that I sought to have assurance of this through a friend of his in the Society who is in Salamanca; it contains what the prioress wrote me. I am happy that he has enough to eat. Perhaps he will be better off, even for God's service. If you think it wise, tell her, and send her these lines along with mine.
9. Padre Fray Bartolomé de Aguilar says that he would willingly speak to your community more often, but that he hasn't been asked, and that since he is subject to his superior he needs to be asked. Don't fail to invite him to preach some sermons, and invite him to visit you, for he is very good. You can certainly read the letters. Why not?
