For Padre Doctor Fray Mariano de San Benito in Madrid. 

Hand delivered.
1. Jesus be with your reverence and repay you for the good news you sent me; it seems to be in our favor for many reasons. The messenger boy left at once. May God direct everything for his own greater glory. This is what we are all aiming for and nothing else.
2. I am delighted that you are getting along so well with those Fathers, except that they do not fail to create difficulties. I have been told that Padre Fray Angel wrote to the Bishop of Salamanca not to give permission for the foundation and that they initiated a lawsuit as they did here, no more nor less. O mi padre! How poorly these negotiations are being handled. The foundation could have been already made had they known how to go about it properly. But things have only served to hurt the reputation of the discalced friars. Be assured that to take action at the wrong time never turns out well. On the other hand, I think what happened is part of God's plan and a great mystery. It will be revealed to us. If what you tell me gets done, everything will be settled. God reward you for the esteem you show for my opinion; may he be pleased that this continue. It seems to me you are receiving good advice where you are and that it's not necessary that you pay much heed to what I say. It is a great consolation to me that the negotiations are in such good hands. May he who does this be blessed, amen.
3. Why don't you ever say anything about Fray Baltasar? I don't know where he is. Give him my regards, and regards to Padre Padilla and Padre Juan Díaz. The prioress here and Brianda from Malagón ask for your prayers. After the latter came here she improved, but tonight she is worse. There is some hope that she will live. May God preserve her, and watch over you.
4. Take care, padre, to be on your guard, and don't grow careless about anything, for the friendships shown to you could be feigned. The true friend to whom we must pay heed is God, and if we try always to do his will there is nothing to fear. I would love to know what that response is, and I also wish that you and Father Master could stay in a place where you would be truly welcome. There is no lack of the cross in this life, however much we may do to escape it, if we belong to the party of the Crucified One.
5. In regard to Antonio Muñoz, he is mistaken, for Doña Catalina de Otálora is not one of our nuns, nor was she ever, but she is a widow who helped that foundation. But I don't believe she is there now, nor do I know her, nor would it be compatible with my religious profession to get involved with that matter. You may tell him this. In fact, I have felt a scruple about what I asked you in this respect. Since I do not know that gentleman well -- between you and me, although he is a close relative of hers, I've only seen him once -- I don't know what task would suit his soul. So I beg you not to pay any attention to my opinion in this matter, but act in accord with what you observe in his personality.
6. Don't say anything about this to him lest he become distressed, for I pity him. But give him my regards and say that I am not writing to him because of the bad condition my head is in, for it is still in a bad state. Tell him that I wrote to his wife, Doña Beatriz today and that the señora of whom he speaks is not a nun.
May God watch over you, for we need you, amen.
Today is 9 May.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
