To the most illustrious Doña María de Mendoza, my lady.
1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your ladyship. Indeed, I have been very sad on this trip. I'm sorry to be so far away from that place. On top of all this, the lord bishop has written me that you are suffering a great trial, but he has not mentioned what it is. With such anxiety about you, I would have tried not to leave, had it not been the eve of my departure. I found help by entrusting the whole matter to our Lord. The thought came into my mind -- I don't know how -- that it has to do with some conflict the administrator caused my Lady Abbess. This consoled me somewhat, for although a soul may be tried, God could be allowing this so as to enrich it. May His Majesty take care of the entire matter as I beseech him to.
2. I was most happy to learn that your health is much better. Oh, if you had the interior dominion that you have in exterior things, how little would all that we call trials here below matter to you. What I fear is the harm they do to your health. I beg you to write me -- there should be many messengers coming to this city -- and tell me in particular what the trouble was, for I am worried about it. I arrived here safely on the vigil of our Lady. Señora Doña Luisa was overjoyed. We spent a lot of time talking about you, which is a pleasure for me, for since she loves you so much she doesn't tire of this.
3. I tell you that the renown you have here is remarkable; may it please the Lord that your deeds will match it. They do nothing else but call you a saint and continually speak your praises to me. May the Lord be praised for your giving them such an example. In what way do you think it is given? In suffering so many trials. In this way the Lord, by means of the fire of love that he sets in your soul, begins to kindle it in others. So, be brave. Look at what the Lord suffered this time of year. Life is short, a mere moment of trial remains for us. O my Jesus, and how I offer to him the pain of my being separated from you and unable to know about your health as I would like!
4. My founding patrons here are very gracious. We are already seeking to get the license. I would like to proceed quickly, and if they give it to us promptly, I think everything will go well. I would like to speak of many things to my Señora Beatriz and to my ladies, the countesses. I often think of my angel Doña Leonor; may the Lord make her his servant. I beg you to give my greetings to Father Prior of San Pablo and to Father superior. The provincial of the Dominicans is preaching here. He has a large following, and rightly so; I have not yet spoken with him. May our Lord guide and preserve you for many years, amen.
Your ladyship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus, Carmelite
