1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be always with your majesty, amen. News has reached me that a memorandum was delivered to your majesty against Padre Maestro Gracián. I am astonished at the intrigues of the devil and these calced Fathers. They're not satisfied with defaming this servant of God (for he truly is and has so edified us that the monasteries he has visited always write to me about how he has left them with a new spirit), but they are striving now to discredit these monasteries where God is so well served. For this purpose they have made use of two discalced friars. The one had been a servant in these monasteries before becoming a friar and did things that made it obvious he often lacked good judgment. The friars of the cloth have availed themselves of this discalced friar and others antagonistic toward Padre Maestro Gracián -- for he is the one who must punish them -- and had them sign things that were absurd. I would laugh at what is said about the discalced nuns if I didn't fear the harm the devil can do with it, for in our communities such things would be horrendous.
2. For love of God I beg your majesty not to allow such infamous testimony to be presented to tribunals. The world is such that some suspicion can remain -- however well the opposite is proven -- if we provide the opportunity. It is not helpful for the general reform that aspersions be cast on an order that by the goodness of God has been so well reformed. Your Majesty could, if you care to, acquaint yourself with this reality through some testimonies that were gathered by order of Padre Gracián. They concern certain facts about these monasteries taken from some serious and saintly persons who have dealings with these nuns.
3. Since the motives of those who wrote the memorandum can be investigated, consider, your majesty, for love of our Lord, that this matter is something concerning God's honor and glory. If those of the cloth see that you are paying attention to their testimonies, they will accuse the visitator of heresy to prevent any further visitations, and where there is little fear of God this will be easy to prove.
4. I feel sorry for all that this servant of God suffers, despite the rectitude and perfection with which he proceeds in everything. This obliges me to beg your majesty to favor him or give orders that he be removed from this situation so full of perils, for he is the son of parents who are in your majesty's service, besides his own good qualities. Truly, I think he is a man sent by God and his Blessed Mother. His devotion to her -- and it is great -- is what led him to the order and to helping me. For more than seventeen years I suffered alone from these Fathers of the cloth, and I no longer knew how to bear it; my own weak efforts were insufficient.
5. I beg your majesty to pardon me for being so lengthy. The great love I bear you has made me bold and I reflect that since the Lord puts up with my indiscreet complaints, you will also.
6. May it please him to hear all the prayers of the discalced friars and nuns that he preserve your majesty for many years, for we have no other support on earth.
Written in St. Joseph's in Avila on 13 September 1577.
Your majesty's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
7. I suspect that since Tostado will remain in his present position, the visitation will be of no benefit, but rather very harmful, especially since that preacher who was previously a calced friar, and about whose life I beg your majesty to inquire, has linked up with him. And if it is necessary, all of us discalced nuns will swear that we never heard Padre Gracián speak a word -- nor did we see anything in him -- that was not edifying. And he was so extremely cautious about not entering the enclosure of the monasteries that even in conducting the chapters, when entering would seem unavoidable, he usually did so at the grille.
