To the very magnificent and reverend Señor Rodrigo de Aranda, in Madrid.
1. Jesús. May the Holy Spirit be with your honor, and may the Lord repay you, mi padre, for the consolation your letters give me. The favorable sentence given in the litigation has been a tremendous one for me. I thanked our Lord abundantly. I don't know if finding so much pleasure in a temporal matter speaks of much perfection. I believe your joy must have been very great and that I can extend congratulations to you, and so I do. Your absence at a time like this has made us feel alone. God willing, things will be smoothed over so that we won't need any favor from my lady, the marchioness, or any of your zealous efforts.
2. You should know, mi padre, that the nuns are in a situation that pains me very much -- I mean the nuns at the Incarnation. I strongly desire that they obey the present prioress as prioress; they do obey her but only as vicaress. Perhaps they are mistaken, but it seems to them that the well-being of that house depends on what has been done and that it will be destroyed because the friars will be going back there. So they say they want to wait as long as they can. For goodness' sake, would you find out if there is any way in which Tostado or the provincial could absolve them, or if the nuncio could intervene, for nothing is being done in the tribunal about it. If this situation were to go on for a long time, it would be hard to manage.
3. Would you speak about it also to Señor Licentiate Padilla and, if appropriate, write to Padre Julián de Avila, who is very influential with them, to see if perhaps he could get them to obey Doña Ana. For since the nuns know I don't want to go there, they pay little attention to what I say.
4. I beg my lady the marchioness to help in this matter in any way she can. If I saw the nuns were pacified, I would be greatly consoled. I am not writing to Señor Licentiate Padilla so as not to tire him, for he has trials enough; but I greatly desire to know what is happening concerning Tostado. Read these details about the nuns to the licentiate, I beg you, for things cannot go on as such and should have been resolved already. It is a great disturbance, and offenses against God will not be lacking.
5. May His Majesty watch over you. Your daughters commend themselves to your prayers.
Today is the vigil of St. Martin.
6. If after you have inquired into everything -- and after you have spoken with Señor Licentiate Padilla -- you cannot find a messenger who will come immediately, my lady the marchioness will send you one of hers. And if you see that doing that would prove troublesome, then hire a messenger and we will pay the expense here. It wouldn't do to prolong the waiting beyond next week; otherwise, as you can see in Fray Juan's enclosed note, the house will be in turmoil. And if you should hire a messenger, let Señor Licentiate Padilla and Señor Roque de Huerta know, for perhaps they may have some letters from our padre to send us.
May the Lord direct everything, for these things are painful to me, and may he watch over you.
Today is the vigil of St. Martin's feast.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
7. I am writing to the licentiate Señor Padilla, and so you need not speak of anything more than about how to proceed, for matters are such that there is no time for delay. Show him the enclosed note. 
