To the very magnificent and reverend Señor Licentiate Gaspar de Villanueva, mi señor in Malagón.
1. Jesus be with your honor, mi padre. I assure you that if the condition of my head matched my desire to write to you at length, this would not be so short. I was very happy to receive your letter.
2. As for the matter concerning your sister, and my daughter, I am glad that it doesn't depend on you or her. I don't know what all the fuss is about or on what grounds the Mother President is basing herself. The Mother Prioress, Brianda, wrote me about this; I am answering her. I suggest that you do what she says in a letter she will write you, if you are in agreement. And if you are not, whatever the decision, I don't want to speak any more about this matter.
3. Concerning Sister Mariana, my desire is that she make profession according to her rank. As long as she knows how to recite the psalms and is attentive to all the rest, nothing else is required, I'm sure. Other professions have been made under the same conditions with the approval of learned men. I will tell this to the Mother President, unless you disagree. And if you do I submit in advance to your orders.
4. I beg you to give my regards to Sister Juana Bautista and to Beatriz. Since the nuns have you there, they don't need to go to Mother about their interior life, because it seems they don't feel consoled with her. I want them to stop their complaining! This woman is not killing them, nor is she neglecting the house, nor does she fail to provide for their needs, for she is very charitable. I have come to understand the nuns in that house, but until Padre Visitator goes there nothing can be done.
5. Oh, mi padre, what a trial it is to see so much instability in the nuns in that house. And how many things they found insufferable in the one whom they now adore! They practice the perfection of obedience mixed with a great deal of self love. And so God punishes them in the very thing where they are at fault. May it please His Majesty to perfect us in everything, amen. These sisters proceed very much like beginners, and if they didn't have you there, I wouldn't be so surprised. May our Lord watch over you. Don't fail to write, for your letters are a comfort to me, and I have few consolations.
17 April.
6. I thought of answering Sister Mariana, but my head is certainly in no condition to do so. I beg you to tell her that if she behaves as well as she writes, we will pardon her not being able to read so well. Her letter consoled me very much. I am sending her in response the permission to make profession. Even if she cannot make profession in the hands of our padre, in the event that he delays a great deal in coming, you needn't prevent her from making it, unless you think otherwise. Your hands are good for giving the veil, and she should consider only that she is making her profession in the hands of God, as is true.
Your honor's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
