1. Jesus. May the Holy Spirit be with your honor, mi padre. I received your letter and with it your kindness and charity as always; of these you have shown me so much that I don't know what to say other than beseech God to repay you for them and for everything else.
2. As regards your visit here, I tell you that I felt so sorry to see you in the company of someone who caused you so much grief and to see the poor health you suffered while here. Save for a great need I would not have begged you to take a vacation at such a cost to yourself so as to please me. Now I have no need, glory to God, although business matters and troubles are never lacking and prevent me from enjoying the rest that I would like. So rather, I beg you not to come, but to consider where you would be happiest and go there, for one who works the entire year has need of such a thing. Besides if Father Visitator should decide to come while you are here, I wouldn't have much chance to enjoy your company.
3. Believe me, mi padre, I have understood that the Lord doesn't want me to have anything in this life but crosses and more crosses. And what is worse is that all those who desire to comfort me end up sharing in them, for I see that he wishes to torment me even in this way. May he be blessed for everything.
4. I deeply regret Padre Padilla's misfortune, for I hold him to be a servant of God. May it please the Lord to make the truth known. For anyone who has so many enemies undergoes much tribulation, and we all run this same risk. But it is only a small thing to lose one's life and honor for love of so good a Lord. Always recommend us to him, for I tell you everything is in chaos.
5. My health is fair. Although the arm is always crippled, for I cannot dress myself, it is getting better, and I would like to be getting better in loving God.
May His Majesty watch over your honor and give you all the holiness that I beg of him, amen.
Today is July 28.
Your honor's unworthy servant and true daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
6. All these servants of yours entrust themselves very much to your prayers. Don't give your consent for the prioress to stop eating meat, and tell her to take care of her health.
