For our Father Visitator, Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián de la Madre de Dios; hand deliver.
1. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your paternity, mi padre. If you had not passed through here, I would have merited little from these trials, because they caused me almost no suffering, but afterward I paid for everything at once. I tell you I was so moved to see you that all day yesterday, Wednesday, my heart was in anguish not knowing what to do at seeing you so afflicted, and rightly so, on being in such danger in everything and constrained to go about in hiding like a criminal. But my trust in a good outcome does not leave me for a moment. The fact is, mi padre, that God has found a good means for me to suffer in desiring that the blows strike where they hurt me most.
2. Today, the vigil of our Lady, the good Roque sent me a copy of the ordinance, which consoled us greatly. Since the king takes the position he does, you will be free of danger, which is what was tormenting all of us nuns. As for all the rest, I see much courage in these sisters. The Lord has willed that my pain not last long, and it was lucky that you left when you did and went by way of the Escorial.
3. By means of this messenger, whose name is Pedro, you can tell me what happened and what is happening in every respect. Let Valladolid know, for they are disturbed. They sent a messenger once they learned what happened to Padre Fray Juan de Jesús.
4. Moreover, don't forget to see if you can do anything for Fray John of the Cross and to let me know if it would be opportune for us to send someone to the nuncio so that he witness a certain obedience on the part of the discalced Carmelites, since we have in fact given him our obedience. We will also look into these matters here and do what seems best in the event that you are not there. After we have obeyed, doing this will not be harmful to the justice of our cause. Today I received letters from Valladolid and Medina. They have not received any notification. These brothers of mine must have known what was happening here, for I don't believe they were just being lazy.
5. Mi padre, I am very worried that in this ordinance and in all this turmoil no visitator is named other than mi padre Gracián. I would not want anything to come from Rome against him. So it seems to me you ought to recall the light that Paul saw -- for it seems it was confirmed by what Angela saw -- and withdraw as much as you can from this fire, as long as you don't anger the king, and no matter what Padre Mariano tells you. Your conscience is not of the kind that can adapt to contrary opinions. In fact even when there is nothing to fear you go about in torment, as has happened these past days; and everyone will approve of what you do. Let them manage their own battles.
6. Once everything is very settled and secure, you will be doing a great deal by exposing yourself to danger without having scruples to add to it. I tell you certainly that the greatest distress I have felt in this turmoil is the fear, hidden I don't know where in me, that you will not be freed of your charge as visitator. If the Lord wills this, he will watch over you as he has up to now, but I will not be free of torment.
7. For you to withdraw as I have mentioned, your sound judgment will be necessary so that you don't appear to be afraid of anything other than offending God, and that is true. And if you should speak with the nuncio, defend your position if he is willing to listen and explain that you will be always happy to obey him, and that you accepted that charge because you knew that Tostado wanted to cut short the reform that has been started and that he could inquire about how we are living and things of that sort. Take advantage of every opportunity to speak about our becoming a separate province and the required conditions. For everything depends on this, and the reform as well.
8. You must speak with the king, the president, the archbishop and all explaining to them the scandals and battles that arise when this is not done, especially with these friars in Castile. Since they have no visitator or means for safeguarding justice, they do whatever they want. You will know how to say it better, for it's foolish of me to be putting this down here, but all your other cares might cause you to forget. I don't know if Pedro  will be the one bringing this, for he can't find a mule. In any event the messenger will be a safe one. Keep me informed about everything, for goodness' sake, even though you have little time, and tell me how Padre Mariano is.
9. The sisters here entrust themselves very much to your prayers. Were you to know how concerned they are about you in your sufferings, you would be pleased, and their praise is all for you, mi padre. I regret that we sent a messenger to the sisters in Beas and Caravaca. They must be distressed, and they will not be able to know anything further for a while, even though our letters were filled with hope, except for what referred to your suffering so that they would pray harder to God for you. If there is someone in those parts who can inform them, tell Roque, for charity's sake. Yesterday I sent him 50 ducats and today the remainder of the 1,000 reales. I am very sorry you have to remain there in this heat and go hungry. Since it will take a long time for these affairs to be settled, it might be good if you came to Mancera. Consider this, out of charity, for we would be closer.
10. Let me know what has happened with those from Pastrana who were imprisoned. Oh, if your visit to me could be repeated so as to repair the torment caused by the previous one. May God bring this to pass and grant me the favor of seeing you in a situation in which I don't have to go about with so many fears, amen.
It is the feast of the vigil of our Lady of August. After all, on her feast days trials and consolations come as her gifts.
Your paternity's unworthy subject and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
