For mi padre, Maestro Fray Jerónimo Gracián de la Madre de Dios. 
1. ... all this would be most important, or at least to send one, but it would be better for two to go. Both are good friends of the Jesuits, which would be no small help in the negotiations. In any case, for goodness' sake, write to us at once and don't keep us waiting any longer. Everyone is amazed that we don't have anyone in Rome to carry on our business for us, and so those others do whatever they want. The two chosen to go ought to bring a record of the request made by the discalced friars to have their own protector.
2. The moment has come for us to move quickly; there is little time, as you see. You can inform me from there if it is already too late, for however much we want to hurry, it seems a month will be needed. I laugh to think that I am speaking as though everything is ready, those who are to go and the means necessary for such a trip. But if we don't begin, nothing will get done. We should have started when we obeyed the brief.
3. Fray Antonio is complaining terribly that we did not say anything to him, and he is right. I am surprised at Roque, since there are so many messengers between Madrid and Granada. I told Fray Antonio that you should have informed him and that he had been able to use his powers without scruple as long as nothing was known. I don't know where the letter ended up. If I find it I will send it to you. I tell you I felt sad that you have discalced friars like that with so little loyalty. I am referring to the one who went off with Fray Baltasar. The calced jailers treated you better. Please God he won't try anything else when he is free; as for the rest, it's better that he is out.
4. I'm afraid those of the cloth have taken Fray Juan de la Miseria prisoner, for ever since they say they last saw him, he has not been seen. May the Lord provide a remedy for everything and guard you for us, as I and these daughters of yours beg of him, amen.
5. My health is fair. The prioress of Salamanca has written me that she wrote informing you she has already received the nun.
Today is the feast of St. Michael.
Your paternity's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
6. Tell Padre Mariano what you think you should from this. Give my regards to him and to Fray Bartolomé. And answer me soon about Rome. You ought to know that there is someone in Madrid from the Society who is a good friend of mine. They say that he is there by order of the president. It could be that they are from the same region. If it would be helpful, I will write to him. His name is Pablo Hernández.
7. This letter was entrusted to a carrier who got sick, and it was returned to me. I opened it to see what I said and it seems to me that you should see it, even if it might tire you.
