For Mother Prioress of St. Joseph's in Seville.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. Today, 8 February, I received the last letter that you wrote me, which was the one dated 21 January.
2. I felt the greatest distress over the mishap of our holy prior; and if he dies from this accident, I'll feel it more than if God were to call him because of age or illness, which I don't think would cause me so much grief. Now I know this is silly, for the more he suffers the better this is for him. But when I recall what I owe him and the good that he has always done for us, I can't get over feeling that a saint will be gone from earth while those who do nothing but offend God live on. May His Majesty give him what is most fitting for his soul, for this is what we ought to ask, we who owe him so much, instead of thinking about what the house will be losing. We are all praying fervently for him. I am also distressed that I don't know where you can write me about his health, to La Roda or Villanueva de la Jara (which is nearby). It will be a miracle if God leaves him here on earth for us.
3. You perceive it as diffidence on the part of the monasteries that they did not write to you. If they had, it would have been a courtesy we ought to avoid. But you should know that they were very diligent about praying for all of you and felt very sorry. When I told them what the Lord had done to correct everything, they were greatly consoled. But the prayers were so many that I believe you will begin to serve God in that house with an entirely new fervor, for prayer is always efficacious.
4. I have been sorry about the illness of the new subprioress, for I thought she was as healthy as usual. And this is also what made me want her to be subprioress, that she relieve you of some work. When one feels like that, it is very beneficial in this region (on the advice of good doctors) to drink four or five sips of rose water. It does me much good, and orange blossom water does me much harm; although the scent of orange water is beneficial for the heart, but it's not good to drink it. Give her my best regards. Despite everything, I hope in God she will carry out the office well. Always give her authority and punish those who in your absence do not obey her as they would you. You have to give her authority, and that is very necessary.
5. I have always been a bit suspicious of that little Leonor. You do well to proceed with caution -- I mean suspicion -- that she will pay heed to her relative. The elderly one seems to me to be very balanced. And it is for her that I have felt most sorry. Give her my best regards.
6. I have written you a long letter through Serrano, for he told me he was going to leave for Seville soon. He cannot get used to it here. Look after him, for the licentiate has told me that he told him he wants to go to the Indies. This has been weighing on me, for it is a foolish idea. I will never finish thanking him for the fidelity that he showed all of you there in a time of so much need. I also wrote through him to Padre Nicolao, and I don't believe he has left yet. I wish I had the letters here. I have already written you at length about this foundation on which I am going.
7. In one of them, I believe, I wrote to Father Prior not to go ahead with buying a house without your first seeing it and seeing it again and again, for the superior will give permission for this at once. Remember what happened there and how poorly those fathers understand what is necessary for us nuns in such situations. All things take time, and how true is the saying, "whoever doesn't look ahead ..." Always keep before your eyes what the devil did to destroy that house, and the trials it cost us, so that you don't move without having consulted many and having thought the matter over well. In business matters, I wouldn't trust much the prior who is there. And don't let it ever cross your mind that there is anyone who would be more delighted if all of you were well situated than myself. And always realize that it is more necessary that the house have nice views than that it be in a good place -- and an orchard if possible.
8. The discalced Franciscan nuns in Valladolid thought that they had done very well by getting a house near the chancery and they moved from their former place. They were left, and still are, very much in debt and are most disturbed, for they feel as though they are in a cave, and they don't know what can be done; they can't make the least sound without being heard. I certainly love you more than you think, that is, tenderly, and so I desire that you do the right thing in all matters, especially in one so serious. The bad thing is that the more I love the less I can bear any mistake. Now I well know that this is foolish and that by making mistakes one gains experience. But if the error is serious, one is left with nothing, and so it is well to proceed cautiously.
9. I feel very sorry that you have to pay interest, for doing this is a wearisome thing and produces nothing. But since it is Father Prior's opinion, it must be the best you can do. May it please the Lord to provide a solution for you soon; this is very disquieting. I greatly wish my brother could wait. Were he to see that you are in need, I know that even though his is great he would wait. Certainly I have never told him that you received something from the Indies. He has a good deal of interest that he has to pay, and in Valladolid he has sold a part of what you are giving him, which is worth a thousand ducats in Seville, and here one hundred ducats less. So he has gone to live in the small place he bought. He spends a great deal, and since he is accustomed to having more than enough and being the type who won't ask anyone for anything, he is worried. He has written me here twice concerning the matter. I am delighted about what you are doing, for he himself didn't ask you to give any more than a half of what you owe, if possible. Recommend this matter urgently to Father Prior.
10. You have been generous in what you have given to the order. May God reward you. No house has given so much, save Valladolid, which has given fifty more. And it comes at just the right time, for I didn't know what to do for our friars who are in Rome. From what they say, they deserve great pity. And this is the time now when they are most needed there. May God be praised for everything.
11. I sent the letters to Padre Gracián. He is writing to Padre Nicolao about it, according to what he wrote me. I was greatly relieved that we can at least write to him. Since he is going to be down there, my daughter, be careful about what you do. There is in your midst someone who is watching you. Recall the dangers we placed ourselves in because of a carelessness filled with good intentions. And if we have not corrected ourselves after this, I don't know what it would take, since this cost us so dearly. For the love of our Lord I beg you not to act otherwise. Since he is no longer visitator, we don't have to fear what they might give him to eat. There is no need of doing what we did when he was visitator.
12. I don't know how you can say that I guessed about the corporals that you made, for you yourself wrote to me about it in the letter brought by Serrano. Don't send them to me until I see a need for them. May God watch over you -- he who cares for all things -- and make you very holy.
13. Do not oppose or regret Father Prior's leaving, for until what is so important has been concluded, it is not right for us to be looking out for our own benefit. Always keep this in your prayers and me as well, for I now have more need of them so that this foundation will be successful. Consider greetings from the prioress and sisters as given, for writing tires me out.
Today is 9 February.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
If Padre Nicolao has left, tear up the enclosed letter for him. You may read it if you want, but then tear it up.
