For Madre María de San José, prioress of the discalced Carmelite nuns.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. You can well believe that I would be happy to be in a condition to write you a long letter, but my health has been poor these days. It seems I am paying for having been well in Malagón and Villanueva and along the roads. Not for many days or even years, I believe, had my health been so good. It was a great favor from our Lord, so now it doesn't matter that I'm not well.
2. Since Holy Thursday I have had one of the worst attacks ever of paralysis and heart pains. I've had a fever up until now -- which still hasn't left -- and I am in such a state of weakness that I accomplished a great deal in managing to stay at the grille with Padre Nicolao, who has been here two days now and whose presence made me happy. At least you were not forgotten. I am amazed at how you have fooled him. I am helping you in that, for I see that this won't be a bad thing for that house. What is worse is that it seems his illusion is sticking to me. May it please God, my daughter, that you don't do anything to disillusion him, and may the Lord be your guide. I was very happy about the good things you told me concerning those sisters. I would very much like to meet them. Tell them that and give them my regards and ask them to pray for the negotiations going on over Portugal and that Doña Guiomar may have children. It is a pity to see the state the mother and daughter are in because she doesn't have any. Take this very much to heart, for you owe it to her. She is a very good Christian, but this trial is costing them both dearly.
3. I have received some letters from you, although the one that Father Prior of Pastrana brought is the longest. I am delighted that he has left the affairs of that house in such a good state, and now with Padre Gracián going there you will not lack anything. Make sure, my daughter -- there may be someone who will exaggerate what you are doing -- that you avoid occasions for criticism. In truth, I believe that he is well aware of this.
4. I was startled by some of the things Padre Nicolao told me. Today he gave me the reports, which I will read little by little. That soul frightens me. May God provide a remedy. The plan for dealing with her that he gave you seems fine to me. Don't get careless about the other nun either.
5. He told me how generous you were in contributing toward the cost of the negotiations for the order. God reward you, for I did not know what more to do here. Mostly everything is done. They are expecting the official communication to come any day, for it has arrived there, and the news is very good. All of you thank our Lord. Because Father Prior will write at length, I am not saying anything more about this.
6. Regarding that house they are selling you, he praised it highly to me, and also for having an orchard and views. In our manner of life, this is an important matter, especially because of the income you are going to have. That it is so far from Los Remedios presents a difficulty, I think, for the confessor. He doesn't say whether it is far from the city or adjacent to a section of it. Whatever be the case, you should not negotiate the purchase of anything without seeing it first, along with two other nuns from among those you think are more knowledgeable. Any superior will authorize your going out for this. Don't trust any friar, or anyone else; you well know the trick they tried to play on us. I wrote to you about this in another letter; I don't know if it arrived there.
7. My brother's response to your letter to him is enclosed. I opened it by mistake but did not read any more than the beginning words. As soon as I saw it was not for me, I closed it. Father Prior is leaving with me the documents for withdrawing the money here, but I lack the delegation to do so. Roque de Huerta has it and he has left for your region on official business. Anyway, send it with the document Father Prior asked you to send for Valladolid and address it to the prioress of this house. For if God gives me a little health, I won't be here much beyond the end of this month. They are giving me orders to go to Segovia and from there to Valladolid to found a house in Palencia, which is four leagues from there.
8. I told them to send you the account of the foundation in Villanueva, and so I am not saying anything more here except that they are doing very well and I believe that our Lord will be greatly served there. From here I brought as prioress a daughter of Beatriz de la Fuente. She seems very good and as suited for the people there as you are for Andalusia. San Angel, from Malagón, is subprioress there in Villanueva. She handles the office very well, and the other two with her are truly saints. Ask our Lord that he may be served by these foundations. Remain with him, for I am in no condition to say more. Although the fever is slight, the pains in the heart and the uterus are severe. Perhaps it won't amount to anything. Pray for me, you and all the nuns. Beatriz de Jesús will tell you about Madre Brianda.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
9. Our Madre arrived here on the eve of Palm Sunday, I along with her. We found Madre Brianda to be so sick from the blood she has spit up that they wanted to give her extreme unction. Now she is somewhat better, although some days she still spits blood and she has a continual fever. There are days when she gets up. Think what would have happened if they had brought her to Malagón. She -- and the community -- would have been lost, and the nuns would have undergone a real trial because of the needs of the house.
10. Our Madre has taken away two other nuns now; please God that will be enough. Have the nuns pray for her and for me, for I have great need.
11. Pray for the election of the general, that they will elect someone who will be a good servant of His Majesty. I encountered Padre Gracián here; he is well. Concerning the stove, we want you to know that we spent almost one hundred reales, and it was worthless -- so much so that we broke it apart. It used up more wood than any benefit that was coming from it.
12. Send someone to visit the prior of Las Cuevas for me and give him my best regards, for -- being in my present condition -- I'm unable to write. And see to it that now you take more care to have someone visit him so that it doesn't appear that because he is not in a position to help us, we are forgetting him; it would seem bad ...
