1. Jesus be with your reverences, amen. My health is not good, but even if it were very good, I would have no reason for feeling secure about a life that comes to an end so quickly. As a result, I thought of writing to you this report about what should be done if, please God, Don Francisco makes his profession of vows.
2. The documents concerning the legacy for your house are definitive. God knows the care and labor it cost me to get them to this point. Blessed be God who has done this; they state matters most firmly. We are keeping them in this house in the chest with three keys. Because I need them at times, I am not sending them now. With them is my brother's will (may he be in glory) and everything else that was necessary for making it legal. These documents will be delivered to you from here, for it wouldn't be suitable that they be kept anywhere else than in your house, and safely guarded in the chest with three keys.
3. If Don Francisco should make his profession, you will have to find out what is in his will and give him from the annual income all that he needs to spend, for in his will he can only dispose of this year's income and, I believe, movables.
4. Then the property has to be divided between Don Lorencio and Teresa de Jesús. Until she makes profession, she can dispose of her part as she wishes. Clearly she will do what you tell her, but it is only right that she remember her aunt Doña Juana who is in such need. Once she has made profession everything goes to the house.
5. Don Lorenzo's part will be entrusted to the same administrator, who will give a separate account of everything that is spent. As for how the money is to be spent, the prioress and nuns have nothing more to do than abide by what the will says.
6. First of all the chapel my brother wanted -- may he be in glory -- must be built. What is left from the four hundred ducats owed by the Seville Carmel should be spent on behalf of Lorenzo for the altarpiece, the grilles, and everything necessary. The prioress has already informed me that she will send at least two hundred ducats soon.
7. It seems to me the will says -- I don't remember well -- that in the distribution of Don Lorenzo's revenues, I should in some things do what I think best. I say this because I understand my brother's desire was to construct the vault of the main chapel according to the drawing that was made for this and that you all saw. By my signature here, I affirm that it is my will that in building the chapel for my brother -- may he be in glory -- the said vault of the main chapel be constructed and an iron grille made, not the most costly but well fashioned and pleasing to the eye.
8. If Don Lorenzo is called from this world by God and doesn't have any children, then the main chapel should be built as the will directs. Be careful not to trust the administrator too much, but seek to have the chaplains go frequently to La Serna to observe how well it is producing. For this property should be valuable, and if one is not very careful, it will quickly go to ruin. In conscience you are obliged not to let that happen.
9. Oh, my daughters, how much weariness and strife these temporal possessions carry along with them! I have always thought this, and now I know it through experience; so much so that in my opinion all the worries that I have had in regard to these foundations in a way have not troubled and tired me out as much as this obligation. I don't know whether my grave illness might have been the cause -- certainly it contributed. Pray to God that he might make use of these worries for his service -- this was the main reason I put all my heart into the task -- and pray much for me to His Majesty, for I never thought I loved you so much. May he direct everything for his greater honor and glory and not let temporal riches take poverty of spirit away from us.
On the 7th day of October in the year 1580.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
Keep this report in the chest with the three keys.
