For the Prioress of St. Joseph's.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence, my daughter. I received your letters and the one from Mother Subprioress, and although they were really old ones, I rejoiced to see a letter from you. But my happiness was tempered when I learned of your poor health. A letter you wrote to Padre Nicolao -- the first part of October -- consoled me very much, because in it you say that you are better. Please God you will go on improving. Don't think those swellings are always caused by dropsy. Here there are nuns who suffer from them and have suffered from them, and some are now better and others are on the way to getting better. At any rate, don't fail to take care of yourself and avoid whatever the doctor says is harmful for you, even if you do so for no other reason than to make me happy and not add to the trials that I am undergoing up here.
2. As for me, I have been among the sick since I came to Valladolid. This is why I haven't written you. My head is still so weak that I don't know when I will be able to write in my own hand. But my secretary is so good that I can trust her as much as myself. You should know that I was so sick they didn't think I would live. Now I have been without a fever for some days. I don't know why God leaves me here unless so that during this year I might see his servants die, which is a great torment for me. The death of Padre Soto didn't grieve me too much. But I am distressed over what Padre Gregorio and the others at Los Remedios are suffering. This plague has been all over, and so there is no reason for us to be surprised, but to praise God, for even though there has been great suffering in these monasteries, no discalced nun has died. The good María del Sacramento has been anointed in Alba. Pray very much to God for her, and for me that I might serve God in some way, since he has left me here.
3. What you told me about the former prior of Las Cuevas grieved me very much. For the love of God don't fail to console him in every way you can and send him many greetings on my part -- because of my being so weak I am not writing to him -- and for my Padre Rodrigálvarez compose a special message and give it to him on my part. I see that Father Prior in Pastrana loves you all so much that he doesn't fail to write often about the things going on here, which consoles me greatly.
4. As for what concerns Beatriz, you did the right thing in burning that document, and be sure not to speak about it with her or with anyone. If God is pleased to grant us the favor of seeing this province established, then the decision can be made what should be done about this sister, for as I have often said, it is not good that she go unpunished.
5. I am surprised that there is no message from the Indies for my brother (may he be in glory). At least there should be some letters, for I don't think it is possible that no letters have been written to him. Let me know when the fleet is leaving and if you have remembered what I wrote you about from Segovia, that you try to get information through anyone coming from Ciudad de los Reyes as to whether a gentleman from Salamanca, Diego López de Zúñiga, is alive. If he is dead get two witnesses to testify to this, for he is the one who has to sell us the house for the nuns in Salamanca; they don't have another one, and I fear lest the community will have to be disbanded on this account.
6. Beg and beseech Señor Horacio de Oria to look into this for me and ask him to pray for me and tell him I am careful to do so for him and that I am asking this of him because it is for God's service.
7. Remember to find me a trustworthy messenger through whom I can write to Ciudad de los Reyes in Peru and to the city of Quito. And don't forget to inform me of when the fleet is leaving early enough in advance. There is a regular mail delivery here, for I continually received many letters from this house when I was down there. Or, inform our Padre Nicolao. I am sending him this letter so as to be sure that you inform him.
8. My head is so weak that even dictating tires me, for this is not my only letter today. The nausea I experienced was so great that it weakened me more than the fever.
9. Give my best regards to Mother Subprioress and to all the nuns. I tell you that I have a great desire to see all of you. Everything is possible with God. May His Majesty watch over you as I beg of him, and make you very holy. Let me know if the swelling and the thirst decrease somewhat. All the nuns in this house are praying very much for you. They were amused about the Moriscos. If you don't write to me in your own hand, don't worry about it, for you can trust the subprioress in everything.
On the 25th of October.
Your reverence's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
10. My best regards to San Francisco -- whose letter provided great recreation; and many regards to Sister Juana de la Cruz and the Portuguese nun; and ask all the nuns to pray for Padre Fray Pedro Fernández, for he is nearing the end. We owe him very much and will now miss him greatly. I am sorry about my Padre Gregorio; I would like to be able to write to him. Tell him that this is how saints are made, and I say the same to you, my daughter. I can't get used to not writing you in my own hand.
