1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor, and may he give you spiritual and bodily health. We are all praying with concern for this, and there is no reason for you to thank us, because it is our obligation to do so. And we are doing the same for Señora Doña María. I earnestly ask for her prayers, and may our Lord repay you for the good news you are always sending me.
2. Now I am waiting each day for the news that is lacking and should be here without delay. I am certain there will be no want of diligence on your part to inform us soon. Indeed it makes us praise our Lord that you never tire of doing us acts of favor and charity.
3. I already wrote you that I received the packet of letters from our Father Provincial, Fray Angel, and that I answered him. Now I am writing to him again. If he is not there, would you have the letters forwarded with special care when a messenger is available. It doesn't matter if you don't receive a reply; there is no reason to ask for one.
4. I have not been very well, having the usual ailments. Now I am better and am happy to see the joy those Fathers of mine will have. May it please our Lord that I see them content with everything and that the meeting will enable us to render him great service.
5. I beg you that when you see Señor Juan López de Velasco you tell him that yesterday I received his letter by way of Valladolid and that it would be better if letters were ordinarily addressed here because the postmaster is a friend of mine, and that I will do what you ask. I think I have a good deal to do here now for some days, but even if not, I don't think I will leave -- unless obedience orders me otherwise -- until I see our affairs completed. May God bring this about, as he can, and may he watch over you and give you the temporal and spiritual rest that I and all the nuns beg of him.
6. Madre Inés de Jesús asks for your prayers. Pardon the fact that this is not written in her hand. I was happy to have had the time to write myself, and I wish this were always so.
From Palencia in this house of St. Joseph,
Your honor's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
