1. Jesus be with your paternity and reward you for the consolation you have given me with the information you sent, especially for letting me see the printed brief. All that was lacking for everything to be complete was to have the constitutions printed as well. God will provide, for I am well aware that the work must have been difficult for you. It could not have been easy to put all this in order. May he be blessed who gives you so much talent for everything. This whole affair seems like a dream. For even though we would have had to think hard about what to do, we wouldn't have succeeded in doing anything as well as God has. May he be always praised for everything.
2. I still have hardly read anything, for I do not understand what is in Latin and have to wait both for a translator and until Holy Week is over. Yesterday, the Wednesday of Tenebrae, they gave me the things you sent. So as to have a head capable of assisting at these services, and since we are few, I did not dare push myself to do any more than read the letters. I would like to know where you are thinking of going after your stay in Madrid, for I will always need to know where you are in case something arises.
3. You should know that I have been looking for a house here, and still am, and nothing is found except very expensive ones, with a lot of defects. So, I think we will take the houses that are close to Our Lady despite the disadvantages. If the chapter gives some large corrals that are there, which with time we will have the means to buy, we can prepare a good vegetable garden. The church is built and endowed with two chaplancies. The price has been reduced four hundred ducats, and I believe they will reduce it further. I tell you that I am amazed by the virtue shown in this place. The people give much in alms, and since it will only be necessary that the nuns have enough to eat -- the expenses for the upkeep of the church being many -- I think it will be one of the best houses you have. By removing some upper galleries, they say the cloister will be brighter. As for rooms, there are more than necessary. May God be served there, and may he watch over you. This is not a day for me to go on at length, since it is Good Friday.
4. I forgot to ask you for something, as an Easter treat; please God you will do it. You should know that up until now in consoling Fray John of the Cross for the suffering he endures living in Andalusia (for he cannot bear those people), I told him that as soon as God let us become a separate province I would see to it that he got back up here. Now he asks me to keep my word -- he is afraid they will elect him in Baeza. He wrote asking me to beg you not to confirm it. If this is something you can do, there is every reason to console him because he is tired of suffering. Certainly, mi padre, my desire is that there be only a few houses in Andalusia, for I think they will be harmful to those up here.
5. The prioress at San Alejo, they say, is mad with joy. Her dances and the things she does, they tell me, are charming, and all the discalced nuns here never end their rejoicing at having such a father. Their joy is complete. May God give us such joy in that place where it never ends, and may he give you a very happy Easter. Wish the same to those gentlemen for me, and they will have a happy one if you are there.
6. All the nuns send their best regards, especially my companions. The rest I will leave for my letter to Padre Nicolao. Oh, how delighted I am that you have such a good companion! I would like to know what happened to Padre Fray Bartolomé. He would make a good prior for a foundation.
Your reverence's daughter and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
