1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. Not long ago I answered your letter, and since that letter will have to go from here by such roundabout ways, perhaps this one will arrive sooner. Not daring myself to write to the cardinal so often, although I would be glad to do so, I wanted to write to beg you to tell him that after I wrote to his illustrious lordship, I spent some time with the prior at the house of Santo Domingo in this city, who is Fray Diego de Alderete. We spoke a long while about the matter concerning Señora Doña Elena. I told him that when I had finished my visit with her there a short time ago she was more scrupulous than ever about realizing her desire.
2. He had no more desire than I -- and I can't stress enough that I am opposed -- that she carry out her wishes. Listening to the reasons that I presented to him about the dissipation that could result, of a kind that really frightens me, he concluded that it would be much better for her to remain at home. He pointed out that since we do not want to receive her, she is freed from her vow; the vow was to enter this order and she is not obliged to anything more than to request this. That fact was a great consolation to me because I hadn't known about this.
3. He lives in this city where for eight years he has enjoyed the fame of being a very holy and learned man, and so he seemed to me. The penance he does is great. I had never met him, and so it consoled me greatly to come to know him. It is his opinion in this case that since I am so determined -- and that whole house as well -- not to receive her, we could inform her that she could never be accepted, and that should appease her. For if this drags on with many words, as has happened up until now, she will always go about disquieted. And truly it does not contribute anything to the service of God for her to abandon her children, as Father Prior agreed. But he told me that he had learned that she had received the approval of a theologian so renowned that he did not dare contradict him. His lordship can now be at ease about this matter.
4. I have given notice that even if his lordship grants the permission, she should not be received, and I will inform the provincial. You could tell his lordship whatever in this letter you think will not tire him, and kiss his hands for me. May God keep your honor for many years and give you as much of his love as I desire and beseech of him.
From Soria, 8 July.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
