1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. As a way of resting from other tiresome business, it would be good for you to write to me at times; for certainly when I see a letter from you, it is for me great grace and comfort, even though it renews in me the feeling of solitude at seeing you so far away and me so alone in this place. May God be praised for everything. I give him many thanks that your health is good and that those gentlemen, your brothers, arrived in good health.
2. Since you are now in Burgos, it wouldn't seem right to me -- provided you agree -- if you failed in any way to make every effort toward a foundation there, since God is now inspiring Señora Doña Catalina to sponsor this. Perhaps there is some mystery involved. She has written me. And now I am answering her and writing also to the person to whom she asked me to write. I am beseeching you here to write the letter that Mother Prioress asked you to write and other letters that you judge appropriate, for perhaps fear is holding us back. Doña Catalina says that after we began discussing this foundation, the city gave permission for the foundation of other monasteries. I don't know why they have to make such a fuss over thirteen women for the number is very small -- unless because this is most troublesome to the devil. What you say seems to me a drawback, but there will be other ones to follow. If this is the devil's work, it will prove useless if God wants the foundation.
3. May His Majesty direct everything to his service and preserve you in the holiness that I beg of him for you every day, miserable though I am.
4. Since I have so many letters to write, I cannot be as long as I would like. My health is better than usual, and I don't feel that the cold is doing me any harm, although there is a lot of snow.
From this house of St. Joseph's in Avila, 13 November.
Your honor's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
5. I beg you to do me the favor of giving my best regards to Señor Suero de Vega and to Señora Doña Elvira and assure them that I always take care to pray for them and those angels of theirs.
