1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. You can well believe that I am not at ease and will not be as long as I know you are in Alba. And so I want to know what is being done about this and that you are not neglecting to take action, because the occasion for trouble has by no means gone away. For the love of our Lord, do not be negligent. Winter has begun so early that it won't be a bad idea to go where you will have a more pleasant climate, as is your custom. The devil -- believe me -- is not sleeping, as I have been informed. This is true, and so I am very much afraid that it will be impossible to set matters straight if we wait. And for us to be silent about her will not be taken in a good light.
2. And certainly, setting aside all these very important considerations -- that cannot be exaggerated -- the means that is being suggested is a fitting solution to your daughter's situation; she can't be living with her parents forever. If by chance Gonzalo Yáñez does not offer his house, you cannot avoid going to Galinduste and then coming here from there as was the agreement. In one way or another, for the love of God, stop killing me. Best regards to my sister. My health is reasonably good.
3. You should know that letters have arrived from the Indies, but no money; at the moment in which they were going to send some, they learned of my brother's death (may he be in glory) and need certain documents in order to send it.
4. Agustín de Ahumada says that he will return here in a year, not rich but with hope of favor from the king. They say the king will honor him because he has served much, and that he will be favored by the viceroy who has returned.
5. Don Lorencio married the daughter of a judge who managed to get the natives to pay Lorencio what the king had awarded him. They have done so in such a way that it is said that he receives around seven thousand ducats in income. His wife is a woman of graceful manners, and they say that he is a very discreet and good man. In the letter from his brother, he sends his best regards to you both and to Señora Doña Beatriz as well.
6. He says that he is not sending you anything now because he has had many expenses, that he will send it with another fleet when Agustín returns. Please God it will be something, for however small, it will be a help. I will insist on this very much when I write to him. It wouldn't be a bad idea for you to write and congratulate him and send me the letter.
7. My best regards to Señor Don Gonzalo, and tell him to remember what he promised me; and my greetings to Señora Doña Beatriz. I don't know when she will repay me for all my prayers to God for her.
May His Majesty be with your honors and make you as holy as I beg of him, amen.
Today is 14 November.
Your honor's servant,
Teresa of Jesus
