1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor always. It seems to me that in begging you not to write to me, I was referring to the business about the will. To refuse the favor of receiving letters from you would be foolish of me, for I well understand what a great favor you do me by writing. But it pains me deeply when the purpose concerns things that in conscience I cannot do. And some others that, as I understand it from what they tell me, would not be right for Don Francisco to do either. But since you are being told otherwise, you cannot help being suspicious of my good will, which is very painful to me; and so I have a strong desire to see all these things brought to a conclusion. May the Lord work everything out in conformity with what most accords with his service, for this is the very thing you would like. I never had any other desire, not even its first stirring. I have always wanted what would bring you peace and have seen the many things that Señora Doña Orofrisia deserves.
2. As for what you say about my having written you that our Lord would give you sons, I repeat it and hope in His Majesty that you will have them. I have never paid much attention to the aims of Pedro de Ahumada, and this is also true now. I am so tired of becoming involved in what turns out to be nothing that if I were not obliged in conscience, I would abandon everything, and I had decided in fact to do so. But Perálvarez told me that a decision like that would displease you because it would affect St. Joseph's.
3. Since for my sins they have now made me prioress there, I see that you are right; and also that it is necessary, as far as the house goes, to value its rights so that a conclusion can be reached sooner than what I was told by some learned men. Even though my brother's children (may he be in glory) did not think the will was valid, it remains valid because it cannot be known who opened it; many lawsuits would result. You are right in demanding that everything be clarified, for it is a terrible thing and a huge expense to go about consulting lawyers.
4. May our Lord take care of this matter, as he can, and preserve you many years to the benefit of your children, amen.
Your honor's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
5. Sister Teresa of Jesus kisses your hands. I hope in God that before long we will both kiss them. She and I send our best regards to Señor Don Francisco.
