1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your reverence and with all of the nuns, my daughters. Believe me truly that I would like to write to each one of you individually, but there is such a barrage of correspondence and business matters pouring down on me that it is even difficult to be able to write these lines to all of you together. This is especially so because we have approached the eve of our departure. Pray that our Lord will be served by everything, especially by this foundation in Burgos.
2. I am greatly consoled to know through your letters, and even more so through your words and deeds, of the great affection you have for me. I truly believe, though, that you still fall short of repaying me what you owe me for my affection, even though you have been very generous in the help you have given me. Since the need was great, I have prized your help very much. Our Lord will reward you. It truly seems you serve him, since you have enough to be able to do such a good deed for these poor nuns. All of them are grateful to you for it and will pray to our Lord for you. Since I do this continually, I have nothing to add.
3. I am delighted that everything is going so well for you, especially since there have been some occasions for your being criticized without your having been at fault; that is a lovely thing, for you have had little to endure on this foundation by which you could merit. Concerning our Padre Vallejo, I say no more than ask our Lord always to repay him for the great services he renders His Majesty, along with increasing trials. And since he is doing such a great work for that house, I am not surprised that the Lord wants to give him the means for gaining more and more merit.
4. Look, my daughters, it is right that, when this saint enters, Mother Prioress and all the nuns help her with kindness and love, for where there is so much virtue it is not necessary to be strict about anything, for it will suffice for her to see what the nuns are doing and to have so good a father; I believe you will be able to see this for yourselves.
5. That Mother Subprioress is better was a great joy for me. If she always needs to eat meat, it doesn't matter that she does so even in Lent, for one does not break the rule when a necessity is present; nor should one be strict in this matter. I ask our Lord to give me virtues, especially humility and love for the others, which is what is important. May it please His Majesty that I see you all growing in these, and ask of him the same for me.
The vigil of the feast of King David. Today is the day on which we arrived for the foundation in Palencia.
6. Best regards to my little ones -- for I am delighted that they are well and so pleasant -- and to the doctors. The improvement in Madre María de Cristo's condition makes me very happy, as well as the fact that you have added such beautiful things in such a short time.
Your servant,
Teresa of Jesus
