For Mother Prioress, María de San José, the discalced Carmelite nuns, in back of San Francisco, Seville.
1. Jesus be with your reverence, my daughter, and watch over you for me, amen. I am writing this from Burgos where I now am. It's been twelve days since I arrived, and nothing has been done regarding the foundation. For there has been some opposition. Things are going somewhat the way they went down there. I am beginning to see how much God will be served in this monastery, how all that is happening will be for the best, bringing it about that the discalced nuns will become better known. Since this city is a kingdom, there would perhaps be no remembrance of us if we entered in silence. But this noise and opposition will do no harm, for there are already some women moved to join us even though the foundation has not yet been made. You and the sisters pray to God for this foundation.
2. The one who will bring you this letter is a brother of the lady who is allowing us to stay in her house and through whose intervention we have come to this city. We owe her very much. She has four daughters who are nuns in our houses, and two others who I think will do the same. I say this so that you will be very gracious to him, if he goes there. His name is Pedro de Tolosa.
3. By means of him you can answer me, and you can even send me the money. And for goodness' sake do all you can and send the entire amount, for I am obliged by contract to pay it this year. Don't send it to me the way you did the other money, or I will become angry with you. For by sending it in the way I mentioned, through Pedro de Tolosa, the money will come safely. It will suffice for you to give it to him, and he will deliver it here. If you can in some way show him some kindness, for goodness' sake do so. We won't be losing anything, and we owe it to his sister.
4. Our Father Provincial has been here and has been very efficient in all that has to be done. He is in good health. May God watch over him as is our need. I also have Teresita with me, for they told me that her relatives wanted her to leave the monastery, so I didn't dare have her stay behind. She is virtuous in a very pleasant way. She sends her regards to you and to all the sisters. Give them my best and ask them not to fail to pray for me. The sisters I brought here send there regards. They are very good nuns and bear the trials with a wonderful spirit.
5. Traveling along the way, we got into serious dangers because the weather was so harsh that the attempt to cross the rivers and torrents was bold. As for myself, the trip must have done me harm, for ever since Valladolid, I have had a bad sore throat (and continue to have one). Although they have tried different remedies, it doesn't go away. Now I am better, but I can't eat anything that has to be chewed. Don't be upset, for with the help of God and all your prayers it will soon go away. Such is the reason this letter is not in my own hand. The sister who is writing it asks you in your charity to pray for her.
May he watch over you for me and make you holy, amen.
Your reverence's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
6. See that your answer is a long one. You can do so through the person who is giving you this, for it is a long time since I have seen a letter from you. My regards to Mother Subprioress and to all the nuns.
