CHAPTER 30
 
Returns to the account of her life and tells how the Lord removed many of her trials by bringing to the city in which she lived the saintly Friar Peter of Alcántara, of the order of the glorious St. Francis. Discusses the great temptations and interior trials she sometimes underwent.
 
1. Aware then of the little, or nothing at all, I could do to avoid these impulses, which were so great, I also feared having them; I didn't understand how suffering and happiness could go together. Bodily suffering and spiritual happiness I already knew were truly possible; but such excessive spiritual pain with such very great joy -- this bewildered me.
I still didn't stop trying to resist, but I could do so little that sometimes it tired me. I protected myself with the cross and wanted to defend myself with the means by which the Lord protected all of us. I saw that no one understood me; I knew this very clearly. But I didn't dare mention it except to my confessor, for to have done so would have amounted to saying truly and clearly that I wasn't humble.
2. The Lord was pleased to remove a great part of my trial -- and then all of it -- by bringing to this city the blessed Friar Peter of Alcántara, whom I already mentioned; and I said something about his penance. Among other things, it was verified for me that for twenty years he continually wore a hairshirt made of tin plate. He is the author of some small books in the vernacular on prayer that are now popular, for as one who practiced it well himself he wrote in a very helpful way for those who are given to prayer. He observed the first rule of the blessed St. Francis in all its rigor besides the other things mentioned to some extent above.
3. Well, that widow, the servant of God and friend of mine whom I mentioned, knew that so great a man was here; and she knew also of my need. She was a witness to my afflictions, and she comforted me greatly because her faith was so strong that she couldn't but believe that what all the others attributed to the devil was from the Spirit of God. Since she is a very intelligent and trustworthy person to whom the Lord has granted much favor in prayer, His Majesty desired to enlighten her in matters about which the learned men were ignorant. My confessors gave me permission to confide some things to her, for there were many reasons for trusting her. Sometimes the Lord shared with her the favors He granted me together with counsel very profitable for her soul.
Once she knew that this saintly man was in the city, without saying anything to me, she obtained permission from my provincial that I stay at her house for eight days so that I might be able to talk with him more easily. Both in her home and in some of the churches I spoke with him frequently during this first time he was here; afterward at various times I conversed with him a great deal. I gave him a summary account of my life and manner of proceeding in prayer as clearly as I knew how. I always tried to speak with complete clarity and truthfulness to those with whom I conversed about my soul. I desired that they know even about any first stirrings, and I accused myself of matter that was doubtful and questionable with arguments against myself. Thus without any duplicity or covering over I discussed my soul with him.
4. Almost from the outset I saw that he understood me through experience, which was all that I needed. For at that time I didn't understand myself or how to describe my experiences as I do now (for afterward God enabled me to understand and describe the favors that His Majesty granted me), and it was necessary that the one who understood me and explained these experiences to me should himself have experienced them. Friar Peter greatly enlightened me; I couldn't understand that such an experience was possible, at least as regards the visions that were not imaginative. It seemed to me that I didn't understand either how those I saw with the eyes of my soul were possible. As I have said, only those that were seen with the bodily eyes seemed to me to merit attention, and I didn't experience these.
5. This holy man enlightened me about everything and explained it to me, and he told me not to be grieved but that I should praise God and be so certain that all was from His Spirit that with the exception of the faith nothing could for me be truer or more believable. He was much consoled along with me and showed me every kind regard and favor, and ever afterward he was very solicitous for me and shared with me his own concerns and business matters. Since he saw that I had desires for what he possessed in deed -- for the Lord gave me these in a very definite way -- and saw that I had so much courage, he was glad to talk to me. For anyone the Lord brings to this state finds no pleasure or consolation equal to that of meeting someone to whom they think the Lord has begun to grant these desires. I couldn't then have had many more, in my opinion, and please God I may have them now.
6. He took the greatest pity on me. He told me that one of the worst trials on earth was the one I had suffered (which is contradiction on the part of good men), and that I had still a long way to go; for I was always in need and there was no one in this city who understood me. But he said that he would speak to my confessor and to the one who troubled me the most, for that was this married gentleman whom I've already mentioned. As the one who felt the greatest good-will toward me, this gentleman waged the whole opposition. He is a God-fearing and holy man; but since he had seen that I had so recently been so wretched, he wasn't able to feel assured. Thus the holy Friar Peter assured them, for he spoke to both of them and gave them motives and reasons for feeling safe and not disturbing me any more. My confessor had need of little assurance; the gentleman needed so much that the reasons were still not entirely enough, but they helped to keep him from frightening me so much.
7. We agreed that from then on I would write to him about what happened to me and that we would pray a good deal for each other. For such was his humility that he esteemed the prayers of this miserable one -- which brought much embarrassment to me. He left me with the greatest consolation and happiness and the ability to feel secure in my prayer and not doubt that it was from God; he told me that if I had some doubt about anything, for the sake of greater security, I should make it known to my confessor, and that in this way I would live safely.
But I wasn't able to feel this assurance completely, because the Lord led me by the way of fear, in which I believed an experience was from the devil when they told me it was. Thus no one could make me so feel either fear or assurance that I could give my experiences more credence than that which the Lord placed in my soul. Hence even though Friar Peter consoled and calmed me, I didn't give his words such credence as to be totally without fear, especially when the Lord left me in the trials of soul of which I shall now speak. Nevertheless, I remained, as I say, very consoled. I couldn't give enough thanks to God and to my glorious father St. Joseph, for it seemed to me that since Friar Peter was the general of the commissariat, it was St. Joseph who brought him here; for the commissariat is under the guardianship of St. Joseph, to whom I prayed very much, as I did also to our Lady.
8. It sometimes happened to me -- and even now it does, although not so much -- that I had such very bitter trials of soul together with severe bodily torments, pains, and sicknesses that I wasn't able to help myself. At other times I had more serious bodily illnesses; yet, since I didn't have the sufferings of soul, I suffered them with great gladness. But when they were all joined together the trial was so severe that it afflicted me very much. All the favors the Lord had granted me were forgotten. There only remained the memory so as to cause pain; they were like a dream. For the intellect became so stupefied that it made me walk in the midst of a thousand doubts and suspicions making it seem that I had not understood and that perhaps I had fancied the visions and that it was enough that I was deceived without my in turn deceiving good people. It seemed to me I was so evil that all the wickedness and heresies that had arisen were due to my sins.
9. This was a false humility the devil invented in order to disquiet me and try, if he could, to bring my soul to despair. I have so much experience now of when something is from the devil that since he at present sees that I understand him, he doesn't torment me in this way as often as he used to. He is recognized clearly by the disturbance and disquiet with which he begins, by the agitation the soul feels as long as his work lasts, by the darkness and affliction he places in the soul, and by dryness and the disinclination toward prayer or toward any good work. It seems that he smothers the soul and binds up the body so that it profits from nothing. Even though the soul knows its own wretchedness and grieves to see what we are, and even though we have exaggerated thoughts about our wickedness, as exaggerated as those mentioned, and these are genuinely felt, true humility doesn't come to the soul with agitation or disturbance, nor does it darken it or bring it dryness. Rather, true humility consoles and acts in a completely opposite way: quickly, gently, and with light. From another point of view, this pain gives the soul comfort in that the soul sees what a great favor the Lord grants it though the experience of that pain and how well employed it is. It grieves for its offenses against God; yet, on the other hand, His mercy lifts its spirits. It has the light to be confounded about itself, and it praises God for having put up with it so long. In that other humility caused by the devil, there is no light for anything good; it seems God lays everything to waste with fire and sword. The devil represents justice to the soul, and although it has faith that there is mercy -- because he can't do so much as to make it lose its faith -- it receives no consolation from this faith; rather, when it beholds so much mercy, this knowledge contributes to its torment because it supposes it was obliged to do more.
10. This is one of the most painful, subtle, and beguiling inventions of the devil that I have known. Thus I should like to warn your Reverence so that if he should tempt you in this way you may have some light and recognize it -- if he allows the intellect to recognize it. Don't think it's a question of learning or knowing, for although everything fails me at this time, afterward, when I am freed from them, I know clearly that the feelings are foolish. What I've understood is that the Lord desires and permits this and gives the devil licence to tempt us as He did when the devil tempted Job, although in my case -- since I'm so wretched -- not so severely.
11. This experience happened to me, and I remember that it happened on the day before the vigil of Corpus Christi, a feast for which I have much devotion, although not as much as I should. That time it lasted only until the feastday, for at other times the experience lasts for eight or fifteen days, or even three weeks -- I don't know if any lasted longer. It comes especially during Holy Week when prayer is my delight. What happens is that my intellect is suddenly seized by things sometimes so trivial that at other times I would laugh about them. The devil makes the soul upset in every way he wants and shackles it there without its being master of itself or able to think of anything else than the absurdities he represents to it; they have almost no importance, neither do they bind nor do they loose. He only binds the soul so as to oppress it in such a way as to make it feel uneasy. So it happened to me that it seemed the devils were playing ball with my soul and that it was unable to free itself from their power. What it suffers at this time is indescribable. It seeks out relief, but God doesn't permit it to find any; there only remains the light of reason, which precedes the use of free will, but this light is not clear. I mean that the eyes are almost covered. It's like the case of those who have often gone by a certain path and, although it is night and dark outside, know where they may stumble because of a previously acquired feel for this way and because they have seen it during the daytime, and they watch out for that danger. So it is with respect to not offending God, for it seems the soul moves by habit. Let us leave aside the fact that the Lord holds it in His hands, which is what matters.
12. Faith is then deadened and put to sleep as are all the other virtues -- although not lost. The soul truly believes what the Church holds, but this is pronounced vocally; it seems that on the other hand it is afflicted and made numb so that it seemingly knows God almost as it does something it hears far in the distance. Love becomes so lukewarm that if it hears someone speaking about God it listens as though the truth about Him were something it believes to be what it is because the Church does, but there is no memory of what it has experienced within itself. Going to prayer or remaining in solitude means nothing else but more anguish, for the torment it feels within itself, without knowing why, is unbearable. In my opinion the experience is a kind of copy of hell. This is so, according to what the Lord made known to me in a vision; for the soul burns within itself without knowing who started the fire or where it comes from or how to flee from it or what to put it out with. Should it want to remedy the situation by reading, it would feel as though it didn't know how to read. Once it happened that I started to read a life of a saint to see if it would absorb me, and to console myself by what he suffered; after reading a number of lines four or five times, I understood less from them than I did at the beginning, and so I stopped. This happened to me often, although I recall this instance more particularly.
13. To carry on a conversation with anyone is worse, for the devil gives a spirit of anger so displeasing that it seems as if I want to eat everyone up, without being able to help it; or it would seem to me an accomplishment if one could control one's temper; or the Lord does so by keeping in His hands the soul that is in such a condition lest it say or do anything against its neighbors that might hurt them and offend God.
Well, with regard to going to my confessor, it is certain that what I am about to say happened many times. Although the confessors I dealt with and am dealing with at this time are very holy, they spoke harshly and scolded me; afterward when I told them, they themselves were surprised and told me that to refrain from doing so was not in their power. They tried hard not to do it again, for afterward they felt sorry and even scrupulous about having done this. But when I had similar trials of body and soul and they were determined to comfort me with compassion, they were unable to do so. They didn't say any evil words -- I mean that would offend God -- but said the most unpleasant allowable in a confessor. They must have meant to mortify me; and although at other times I was glad and ready to suffer such mortification, during the time of this experience everything was a torment to me.
I also got the feeling that I was deceiving them, and I went to them and warned them very earnestly to be careful of me since I could deceive them. I saw clearly that I wouldn't do it deliberately nor would I lie to them, but everything made me afraid. One of them once told me, since he understood the temptation, not to feel grieved, that, even if I wanted to deceive him, he had the intelligence not to let himself be deceived. This gave me great consolation.
14. Sometimes (or almost ordinarily -- at least, quite often) after receiving Communion I was at peace. And sometimes in approaching the Sacrament I felt at once so good in soul and body that I was surprised. It seems that in only a moment all the darknesses of the soul disperse; and once the sun is out, the soul recognizes the foolishness in which it is held. At other times, by one word the Lord spoke to me. Only by His saying, "Don't grow weary, don't be afraid," as I've already mentioned elsewhere, I was left completely cured; or by seeing some vision, as though I had not suffered anything. I delighted in God; I complained to Him for consenting that I should suffer so many torments. But this suffering was well repaid, for almost always the favors afterward came in great abundance. I only think that the soul comes out of the crucible like gold, more refined and purified, so as to see the Lord within itself. So afterward these trials that seemed unbearable become small, and one wants to return to suffering if the Lord will be more served by it. And even though there may be more tribulations and persecutions, if they are undergone without offending the Lord but in being happy to suffer them for Him, everything will be for a greater gain -- although I don't bear them as they should be borne, but quite imperfectly.
15. At other times the experience is of another sort. It happens that all of a sudden, I believe, there is taken away the possibility of my thinking any good thing or wanting to do it, and the body and soul feel completely useless and weighed down. I don't have those other temptations and worries, but a displeasure, without understanding why; nor does anything give satisfaction to my soul. I tried to perform good exterior works so as to occupy myself half by force -- I well know the little a soul amounts to when grace is hidden. It wasn't very painful because this sight of my lowliness gave me some satisfaction.
16. At others times I find that I can't even form in a fitting way a thought about God or of any good, or practice prayer, even though I'm in solitude; but I feel that I know Him. I understand that it is the intellect and imagination that does me harm here, for the will is all right it seems to me and disposed toward every good. But this intellect is so wild that it doesn't seem to be anything else than a frantic madman no one can tie down; nor am I master of it long enough to keep it calm for the space of a Creed. Sometimes I laugh at myself and know my misery, and I look at this madman and leave it alone to see what it does; and -- glory to God -- it surprisingly enough never turns to evil but to indifferent things: to whether there is anything to do here or there or over yonder. I then know better the tremendous favor the Lord grants me when He holds this madman bound in perfect contemplation. I wonder what would happen if the persons who think I'm so good were to see this delirium. I greatly pity the soul to see it in such bad company. I want to see it free, and so I say to the Lord: "When, my God, will I finally see my soul joined together in Your praise, so that all its faculties may enjoy You? Do not permit, Lord, that it be broken any longer in pieces, for it only seems that each piece goes its own way."
I often undergo this scattering of the faculties; sometimes I understand clearly that my lack of physical health has much to do with it. I frequently recall the harm original sin did to us; this is the source, I think, of our being incapable of enjoying so much good in an integral way. And my own sins must be a cause; if I hadn't committed so many, I would be more integrated in good.
17. I also suffered another great trial. Since it seemed that I understood all the books I read that treat of prayer and that the Lord had already given me such favors, I thought I had no need of these books and so did not read them but read only lives of the saints. Since I felt so lacking in the ways they served God, reading about them seemed to benefit and encourage me. I thought it showed very little humility to think that I had attained these favors of prayer, and since I couldn't bring myself to think otherwise, it grieved me very much until learned men and the blessed Friar Peter of Alcántara told me not to worry about it. I see clearly that I haven't begun to serve God -- although His Majesty grants me favors as He does to many good people -- and that I am imperfection incarnate, except in desires and in loving; in these latter I see clearly that the Lord has favored me so that I might serve Him in something. It really seems to me that I love Him, but my works and the many imperfections I see in myself sadden me.
18. At other times there comes a foolishness of soul -- that's what I call it -- for it seems to me that I do neither good nor evil, but follow the crowd, as they say. I do so neither in pain nor in glory, nor does it give life or death, or please or weigh me down. It doesn't seem that the soul feels anything. I think it goes about like a little donkey that's grazing; it is nourished because they give it to eat, and it eats almost without perceiving that it does so. The soul in this state must not remain without nourishing itself on some great favors from God. For in a life so miserable it doesn't regret living, and it endures life with equanimity; but it feels no movements or effects by which it might understand itself.
19. It seems to me now the soul is as though sailing with a very calm wind, for one travels far without understanding how. In those other kinds of favors the effects are so pronounced that the soul almost immediately sees its improvement; for then the desires are restless and the soul never succeeds in being satisfied. This is the experience of those to whom God gives the great impulses of love I mentioned. These impulses are like some little springs I've seen flowing; they never cease to move the sand upward. This is a good example of, or comparison to, souls that reach this state: love is always stirring and thinking about what it will do. It cannot contain itself, just as that water doesn't seem to fit in the earth; but the earth casts it out of itself. So is the soul very habitually, for by reason of the love it has it doesn't rest in or contain itself. It is already soaked in this water; it would want others to drink, since it has no lack of water, so that they might help it praise God. Oh, how many times do I recall the living water that the Lord told the Samaritan woman about! And so I am very fond of that gospel passage. Thus it is, indeed, that from the time I was a little child, without understanding this good as I do now, I often begged the Lord to give me the water. I always carried with me a painting of this episode of the Lord at the well, with the words, inscribed: Domine, da mihi aquam.
20. This love also seems like a huge fire that always needs something to burn so as not to go out. Thus in the case of the souls I'm speaking of, even were it to cost them a great deal, they would want to carry wood so that this fire might not be extinguished. I am the kind who is made happy even with pieces of straw I can throw on it; and this I do sometimes -- or many times. On occasion I laugh at myself, and at other times I grow weary. An interior stirring incites me to some service -- I'm not capable of any more: arranging branches and flowers before holy images, sweeping, or putting a chapel in order, doing such lowly little things that it embarrasses me. If I performed some penance, it all amounted to little and was of such a kind that, were it not for the fact that the Lord accepted my desire, I saw that it had no importance -- and I myself made fun of myself. Well, souls to whom God through His goodness gives abundantly this fire of His love suffer no small trial in lacking bodily strength to do something for Him. It is truly a great suffering. Since the soul lacks the strength to throw some wood on this fire and is dying lest the fire go out, I think that within itself it is being consumed and turned to ashes and dissolved in tears and burnt up; this is a terrible torment, although it is a delightful one.
21. Let the soul who has reached this state praise the Lord, because He has given it the bodily strength to do penance, or the learning, talents, and freedom to preach and confess and bring souls to God. For such a soul doesn't know or understand the blessing it has unless it has experienced a taste of what it is to be unable to do anything in the service of the Lord, and yet always receive a great deal. May He be blessed for everything, and may the angels give Him glory, amen.
22. I don't know if I'm doing well in writing about so many details. Since your Reverence again sent me orders not to worry about enlarging this and not to omit anything, I'm dealing clearly and truthfully with what I remember. And I can't help but leave a lot out, because otherwise I would be wasting much more time -- and I have so little as I said --  and perhaps would not put down anything worthwhile.

CHAPTER 31
 
Deals with some exterior temptations and representations of the devil and the torments he inflicted on her. Treats also of some matters very beneficial for advising persons who journey on the path of perfection.
 
1. Now that I've mentioned some interior, secret temptations and disturbances the devil caused me, I want to tell about others he caused almost publicly and in which one could not be mistaken that he was the source.
2. I was once in an oratory, and he appeared to me in an abominable form at my left side. Because he spoke to me, I looked particularly at his mouth -- which was frightening. It seemed that a great flame, all bright without shadow, came forth from his body. He told me in a terrifying way that I had really freed myself from his hands but that he would catch me with them again. I was struck with great fear and blessed myself as best I could; he disappeared, but returned right away. This happened to me twice. I didn't know what to do. There was some holy water there, and I threw it in that direction; he never returned again.
3. Another time I was tormented for five hours with such terrible interior and exterior pains and disturbance that it didn't seem to me I could suffer them any longer. The Sisters who were with me were frightened and didn't know what to do, nor did I know how to help myself. When bodily pains and sickness become intolerable I have the custom of making interior acts of supplication to the Lord as best I can, that if His Majesty be served by my doing so He might give me patience and I might remain in this state until the end of the world. Well, since I was suffering so severely this time, I was helping myself through these acts and resolutions so as to be able to bear it. The Lord wanted me to understand it was the devil because I saw beside me a black, very abominable little creature, snarling like one in despair that where he had tried to gain he had lost. When I saw him I laughed to myself and was not afraid. There were some Sisters there with me who were unable to help nor did they know of any remedy for so much torment; without being able to resist, I was striking myself hard on the body, head, and arms. What was worse was the interior disturbance, for I wasn't able to feel calm of any sort. I didn't dare ask for holy water lest I frighten them and they come to understand what the trouble was.
4. I often experience that there is nothing the devils flee from more -- without returning -- than holy water. They also flee from the cross, but they return. The power of holy water must be great. For me there is a particular and very noticeable consolation my soul experiences upon taking it. Without a doubt my soul feels ordinarily a refreshment I wouldn't know how to explain, like an interior delight that comforts it entirely. This isn't some fancy or something that has happened to me only once, but something that has happened often and that I've observed carefully. Let us say the relief is like that coming to a person, very hot and thirsty, on drinking a jar of cold water; it seems the refreshment is felt all over. I consider everything ordained by the Church to be important, and I rejoice to see the power of those words recited over the water so that its difference from unblessed water becomes so great.
5. Well, since the torment didn't stop, I said: "If you wouldn't laugh, I'd ask for holy water." They brought it to me and sprinkled some on me, but it didn't help. I threw some toward where the devil was, and instantly he went away and all the illness left me as if it were taken away by hand, except that I remained weary as though I had been badly beaten with a stick. It did me a lot of good to reflect upon what he will do to the soul he possesses as his own if even when the soul and body don't belong to him, he causes so much harm -- when the Lord permits. It made me again eager to be freed from such dreadful company.
6. Another time, not long ago, the same thing happened to me; although it didn't last as long, and I was alone. I called for holy water, and those who entered after the devil had already gone (for they were two nuns well worthy of belief, who would by no means tell a lie) smelled a foul stench like that of brimstone. I didn't smell it. It so lingered that one could notice it.
Another time I was in the choir, and there came upon me a strong impulse toward recollection. I left the choir so that the others wouldn't notice, although all of them heard the striking of loud blows near the place where I was; I heard some coarse words next to me as though the devils were plotting something, although I didn't understand what. But I was so absorbed in prayer I didn't understand anything nor did I have any fear. It happened almost every time, when the Lord granted me the favor of persuading some soul to advance in perfection.
7. It is certain that what I shall now tell happened to me. (And there are many witnesses to this, especially the one who is now my confessor since he saw it written in a letter; without my telling him who the person was to whom the letter belonged, he knew very well who it was).
A person came to me who had been in mortal sin for two and a half years. It was one of the most abominable I've heard of, and in all this time he hadn't confessed or made amends; and he was saying Mass. Although he was confessing other sins, of this one he asked how he could confess something so ugly. He had a great desire to give it up, but he wasn't able to help himself. He made me feel great pity, and my seeing that he offended God in such a way caused me deep sorrow. I promised him I would beg God very much to liberate him and that I would get others better than myself to do the same, and I wrote to him through a certain person he told me I could give the letters to. And so it happened that after receiving the first letter he went to confession. For God desired (through the many very holy persons to whose prayers I recommended him) to grant this soul that mercy; and I, although miserable, did what I could with great care. He wrote to me that he was so much better that for days he had not fallen into the sin, but that the torment the temptation gave him was so intense it seemed from what he suffered he was in hell; he asked me to commend him to God. I in turn recommended him to my Sisters through whose prayers the Lord must have granted me this favor, for they took the matter very much to heart. No one could guess who the person was. I begged His Majesty to mitigate those torments and temptations and that those devils would come to afflict me, provided that I would not offend the Lord in anything. As a result, for a month I suffered severe torments; it was during this time that these two things I mentioned happened.
8. The Lord was pleased that they leave him; this he wrote to me, for I told him what I was going through during that month. His soul was fortified, and he was left completely free. He didn't have enough of thanking God and me -- as though I had done anything. But the reputation I had from the fact that the Lord granted me favors benefited him. He said that when he found himself very distressed he read my letters, and the temptation left him. He was very impressed by what I had suffered and how he had been freed. Even I was amazed, and I would have suffered many more years to see that soul free. May the Lord be praised for everything, for the prayer of those who serve Him (as I believe do these Sisters in this house) can do much. But since I sought these prayers, the devils must have been more angry with me; and the Lord on account of my sins permitted this.
9. Also one night during this time I thought they were choking me; after much holy water had been sprinkled around, I saw a great multitude of them go by, as though they were being thrown down a precipice. There are so many times that these cursed creatures torment me, and so little is the fear I now have of them, seeing that they cannot stir unless the Lord allows them, that I would tire your Reverence and tire myself if I told about all these instances.
10. May what was said be of help that the true servant of God might pay no attention to the scarecrows the devils set up in order to cause fear. We should know that each time we pay no attention to them they are weakened, and the soul gains much more mastery. Some great benefit always remains, which I won't go into so as not to enlarge. I shall only mention what happened to me on the night of All Souls: while I was in the oratory after having recited a nocturn and while saying some very devotional prayers that come at the end, a devil appeared on the book so that I couldn't finish the prayer. I blessed myself, and he went away. When I began again to recite the prayers, he returned. I believe it was three times I began, and until I threw holy water at him I couldn't finish. I saw that some souls left purgatory at that instant; little must have been lacking to their freedom, and I wondered if he had aimed at preventing this.
A few times I've seen him in physical form, but many times with no physical form -- as for instance in the vision mentioned above in which without seeing any form one knows he is there.
11. I also want to tell the following because it frightened me a lot: one day on the feast of the Trinity, being in the choir of a certain monastery and in rapture, I saw a great battle of devils against angels. I couldn't understand what that vision meant. In less than fifteen days it became easily understandable on account of a certain conflict that arose between people of prayer and many who were not, and a lot of harm was done in the house in which it took place. It was a battle that lasted a long time and caused much disquiet.
At other times I saw a large multitude of devils around me, and it seemed that a great brightness encircled me, and this prevented them from reaching me. I understood that God was watching over me so that they could not get to me in order to make me offend Him. From what I sometimes saw in myself, I understood that it was a true vision. The fact is that now I have understood so well the little bit of power he has, provided I'm not against God, that I have almost no fear. The powers of devils are nothing if these devils do not find souls cowardly and surrendered to them; it is with such souls that they show their power. Sometimes, in the temptations I already mentioned, it seemed to me that all the vanities and weaknesses of the past were again awakening within me; I had really to commend myself to God. At once the torment came of thinking that since those thoughts arose in me the favors I experienced must all be from the devil. It seemed to me that there shouldn't have been even the first stirrings of a bad thought in one who was receiving so many favors from the Lord. But then my confessor put me at peace.
12. At other times I was severely tormented -- and even now I'm tormented by it -- upon seeing that I was esteemed, especially by eminent persons, and that they spoke very well of me. From this esteem I've suffered and do suffer a great deal. I then look at the life of Christ and of the saints, and it seems to me I'm going in the opposite direction since they didn't advance except through contempt and insults. It makes me walk in fear and as one who doesn't dare raise her head or want to be seen. This I don't do when I'm experiencing persecutions; then the soul walks with head held high, although the body feels them and, from another perspective, I am afflicted; but I don't know how this can be. Yet so it happens, for it then seems that the soul is in its kingdom and puts everything under its feet.
Sometimes I experienced the following temptation, which lasted for many days; it seemed to be virtue and humility on the one hand, but now I see plainly it was a temptation (a Dominican friar, a very learned man, explained it to me clearly): when I thought these favors the Lord grants me would become known publicly, the torment was so excessive that my soul was deeply disturbed. The disturbance reached the point that, in reflecting upon it, it seemed to me I was more willing to be buried alive than have these favors made known publicly. So when these experiences of recollection or rapture began, which I couldn't resist even in public, I was left so ashamed afterward that I didn't want to be where anyone would see me.
13. Once when I was very worried about this, the Lord asked me why I feared since only two things could happen from it; they would either criticize me or praise Him. And He explained that those who believed in the experience would praise Him and that those who did not would condemn me, without fault; that either outcome would be advantageous to me, and that I shouldn't be anxious. This calmed me a great deal and consoles me when I recall it. The temptation reached the point that I wanted to leave that place and transfer my dowry to another monastery much more enclosed than the one I lived in, for I had heard it praised highly. It also belongs to my order; and it was very far from here, which is what would have consoled me: to be some place where they wouldn't know me. But my confessor never allowed me to leave.
14. These fears took away to a great extent my freedom of spirit; afterward I came to understand that they didn't come from genuine humility, since they disturbed me so much. And the Lord taught me this truth: that I should be determined and certain that His favor was not some good thing belonging to me but that it belonged to God; that just as I wasn't sorry to hear other persons praised (rather I was very happy and consoled to see that God revealed Himself in them), I should neither be sorry that His works be shown in me.
15. I also went to another extreme. I begged God -- and I had a special prayer -- that, when it appeared to others there was some good in me, His Majesty would make known to them my sins so that they might see how these favors were bestowed without any merit on my part. I always desire a great deal that my lack of merit be known. My confessor advised against this special prayer. But until very recently, if I saw that a person thought highly of me, in roundabout ways, or as I could, I got them to know of my sins; in this way it seems I found relief. My confessor also disapproved of this latter way of acting and made me scrupulous about it.
16. Such feelings derived, in my opinion, not from humility but from a temptation. It seemed to me I was deceiving everyone. And although it is true that they were being deceived in thinking there was some good in me, it was not my desire to deceive them, nor did I ever have such an aim; but the Lord permits such things for some reason. So even with my confessors, if I saw it wasn't necessary I didn't discuss anything, for doing so would have made me very scrupulous.
I understand now that all these little fears and pains and this appearance of humility came from serious imperfection and from not being mortified. For a soul surrendered into God's hands doesn't care whether they say good or evil about it. It thoroughly understands -- since the Lord desires to grant it the favor of understanding this -- that of itself it has nothing. Let it trust in Him who bestows the favor, for He will know why He makes the favor known; and let it be prepared for persecution, which in these our times will certainly come whenever the Lord desires that it be known He grants these kinds of favors to a certain person. There are a thousand eyes ready to turn on a soul receiving such favors, but on a thousand souls of another kind there's not even one eye ready to turn.
17. Truthfully, there is no small reason for fear, but this must have been my own fear -- not humility but pusillanimity. A soul that God permits to advance in this way before the eyes of the world can well prepare itself for martyrdom at the hands of this world; because if it doesn't want to die to the world, the world will itself put it to death. I really don't see anything in the world that pleases me other than its intolerance of faults in the good, forcing them to be perfect through its criticisms. If someone is not perfect, I say that more courage is necessary to follow the path to perfection than to suffer a quick martyrdom. For perfection is not attained quickly, unless the Lord wants to grant someone this favor by a special privilege. Seeing the soul begin, the world wants it to be perfect, and at a thousand leagues distance it thinks something is a fault which perhaps is a virtue; the one who condemns the actions uses that same action as a vice, and thereby judges others. These souls must not have the means to eat or sleep or even, as they say, to breathe; and the more they are esteemed the more they must forget they are still in the body, no matter how perfect the soul is. They still live on earth subject to their miseries, however much they may have trampled them under foot. So, as I say, great courage is necessary because the poor soul has not begun to walk, and they want it to be flying; it still hasn't conquered its passions, and they want it to be as strong in great occasions of sin as they read the saints were after being confirmed in grace.
What it undergoes in this situation is something to praise the Lord for, and it also excites the heart to great pity; for many souls turn back since the poor things don't know how to help themselves. And I believe mine would have turned back, if the Lord hadn't so mercifully done everything; for your Reverence will see that there was no other ability in me than to fall and rise.
18. I'd like to know how to speak of this condition because I believe many souls who want to fly before God gives them wings are deceived in this matter. (I believe I have already used this comparison, but it applies well here). I'll discuss this because I see some souls very afflicted for this reason. Since they are beginning with great desires, fervor, and determination to make progress in virtue -- and some for His sake abandon everything as far as externals are concerned -- and since in other persons who have grown much more in perfection they see highly virtuous actions granted by the Lord, and unobtainable by ourselves, and see in all the books written on prayer and contemplation the things we must do in order to mount up to this dignity, and since they cannot immediately bring this about in themselves, they become dejected. These virtuous actions would be, for example: not caring at all if others speak badly of us but rather being happier than when they speak well; little esteem for honor; a detachment from relatives so that if these relatives don't practice prayer one wouldn't desire to speak with them but would rather grow tired of doing so; and many other things of this kind which in my opinion God must give these souls. For I think these virtues are already supernatural goods, or against our natural inclination. Let not these souls become anxious, let them hope in the Lord; through their prayer and their doing what they can, His Majesty will bring it about that what they now have in desires they shall possess in deed. It is very necessary for this weak nature of ours to have great confidence and not grow fainthearted or start thinking that even if we make efforts we shall still fail to gain the victory.
19. And since I have a lot of experience of this, I shall say something for the sake of informing your Reverence. Don't think, even though it may seem so to you, that virtue has already been gained if it hasn't been tried by its contrary. We must always be mistrustful of ourselves and never grow negligent as long as we live. For many things immediately cling to us if, as I say, the grace to know what everything is, is not yet given to us completely; in this life there is never anything that hasn't many dangers. It seemed to me a few years ago not only that I was detached from my relatives but that they bored me; so I felt certain that I couldn't bear their conversation. A very important business matter came about and I had to stay with my sister whom I previously loved very much. But in conversation with her, even though she is better than I, I didn't feel any affinity. Since, being married, she is in a different state of life, the conversation couldn't always be what I'd have wanted, and as much as possible I remained alone. Yet I saw that her troubles grieved and worried me more than would those of a neighbor. In the end, I understood I wasn't as free as I thought and that I still had to flee the occasion so that this virtue that the Lord had begun to give would grow; thus with His favor I strove to do so ever after this.
20. When the Lord begins to give a virtue, it should be highly esteemed; and we should in no way place ourselves in the danger of losing it. This is true in matters concerning our honor and in many others. Your Reverence should believe that not all those of us who think we are detached, are in fact; it is necessary not to grow careless in this matter. Let any person who wants to advance and yet feels concerned about some point of honor believe me and strive to overcome this attachment, which is like a chain that cannot be broken by any file but only by God through our prayer and earnest cooperation. It seems to me that such attachment is a shackle on this road -- I am astonished at the harm it does.
I see some persons holy in their works, who perform such mighty ones that the people marvel. May God help me! Why is this soul still on earth? Why isn't it at the summit of perfection? What is this? Who detains the one who has done so much for God? Oh, what does a point of honor have ...! And the worst that it has is that it doesn't have anyone to understand what it has. The reason is that the devil sometimes makes the soul think it is obliged to receive honor.
21. Well, let them believe me (believe for the love of the Lord this little ant, for He wants it to speak); if they don't remove this caterpillar, even though it doesn't damage the tree completely, since some other virtues will remain, all the virtues will be worm-eaten. The tree isn't a beautiful one, nor does it flourish, nor does it even allow the others that are near it to flourish. The fruit of good example that it gives is not healthy; it will last only a short while. I often say that however small the point of honor may be, the concern for it is like that of sound coming from an organ when the timing or measure is off; all the music becomes dissonant. This concern is something that does damage to the soul in all areas, but in this path of prayer it is a pestilence.
22. We are striving to be joined with God through union, and we seek to follow His counsels coming from Christ, who was weighed down by injuries and testimonies against Him, and we desire our honor and credit to remain intact? It's not possible to reach this union, for we aren't taking the same road. The Lord comes to the soul if we make the effort and strive to give up our rights in many matters. Some will say: "I have no occasion to practice this detachment from my rights, nor does any come along." I believe that the Lord will not want anyone with the determination to practice this detachment to lose so much good. His Majesty will ordain so many things by which the soul can gain this virtue that it will not want so many. All hands to the task!
23. I want to mention the trivial and insignificant things I did when I began -- or some of them; little straws I mentioned that I put on the fire, for I'm not capable of anything more. The Lord receives all; may He be blessed forever.
Among my faults I had this one: Because of pure negligence and involvement in other vanities. I knew little about the Office in choir and what had to be done there; but I saw other novices who could teach me. It occurred to me not to ask them so that they wouldn't find out that I knew so little, and I wouldn't thereby give them bad example. Such an attitude is very common. But once God opened my eyes a little, even though I knew, when there was the smallest doubt, I asked the youngest religious. I lost neither honor nor credit; rather the Lord, in my opinion, gave me a better memory afterward.
I didn't know how to sing well. I was so worried when I hadn't studied what they had entrusted to me (not because I wanted to avoid committing a fault before the Lord, since being bothered about that would have been virtuous, but because of the many that were listening to me), that just out of a sheer cult of honor I was so disturbed that I said much less than I knew. I afterward took it upon myself, when I didn't know the assignment very well, simply to say so. I felt this very much in the beginning, but afterward I enjoyed it. And it happened that when I began not to care if they learned I didn't know that I recited much better, and in the effort to get rid of the accursed honor, I came to know how to do what I considered an honor, which, incidentally, each one understands in his own way.
24. By means of these trifles, which are nothing -- and a complete nothing am I, since this pained me -- little by little one makes progress in deeds. And His Majesty gives value to little things like these that are done for Him and He gives the help for doing greater things. So, with respect to humility it occurred to me, upon seeing that all were advancing except myself -- for I was never good for anything -- to gather up all their mantles when they left the choir. It seemed to me I was serving those angels that were praising God there. I did this until -- I don't know how -- they came to know about it. This caused me no little embarrassment because my virtue hadn't reached the point of desiring that they know these things; and this wasn't out of humility but lest they laugh at me, since these things were such trifles.
25. O my Lord! What a shame it is to see so much wickedness and to tell about some grains of sand, which even then I didn't lift from the ground for Your service, since everything I did was enveloped in a thousand miseries! The waters of Your grace didn't flow yet under these grains of sand in order to raise them up. O my Creator! Who could find among so many evils something of substance to relate, since I am telling about the great favors I've received from You! So it is, my Lord, that I don't know how my heart can bear it or how anyone who reads this can fail to abhor me in observing that such marvelous favors were so poorly repaid and that I have no shame, in the end, to recount these services as my own. Yes, I am ashamed, my Lord; but having nothing else to tell about the part I played makes me speak of such lowly beginnings so that anyone who did great things in the beginning may have hope; since it seems the Lord has taken my early actions into account, He will do so more with theirs. May it please His Majesty to give me grace so that I might not always remain at the beginning, amen.

CHAPTER 32
 
Discusses how the Lord desired to put her spirit in a place in hell she had deserved because of her sins. Gives a brief account of what was shown her there. Begins to deal with the way in which the monastery of St. Joseph, where she now is, was founded.
 
1. A long time after the Lord had already granted me many of the favors I've mentioned and other very lofty ones, while I was in prayer one day, I suddenly found that, without knowing how, I had seemingly been put in hell. I understood that the Lord wanted me to see the place the devils had prepared there for me and which I merited because of my sins. This experience took place within the shortest space of time, but even were I to live for many years I think it would be impossible for me to forget it. The entrance it seems to me was similar to a very long and narrow alleyway, like an oven, low and dark and confined; the floor seemed to me to consist of dirty, muddy water emitting a foul stench and swarming with putrid vermin. At the end of the alleyway a hole that looked like a small cupboard was hollowed out in the wall; there I found I was placed in a cramped condition. All of this was delightful to see in comparison with what I felt there. What I have described can hardly be exaggerated.
2. What I felt, it seems to me, cannot even begin to be exaggerated; nor can it be understood. I experienced a fire in the soul that I don't know how I could describe. The bodily pains were so unbearable that though I had suffered excruciating ones in this life and according to what doctors say, the worst that can be suffered on earth (for all my nerves were shrunken when I was paralyzed, plus many other sufferings of many kinds that I endured, and even some, as I said, caused by the devil), these were all nothing in comparison with the ones I experienced there. I saw furthermore that they would go on without end and without ever ceasing. This, however, was nothing next to the soul's agonizing: a constriction, a suffocation, an affliction so keenly felt and with such a despairing and tormenting unhappiness that I don't know how to word it strongly enough. To say the experience is as though the soul were continually being wrested from the body would be insufficient, for it would make you think somebody else is taking away the life, whereas here it is the soul itself that tears itself in pieces. The fact is that I don't know how to give a sufficiently powerful description of that interior fire and that despair, coming in addition to such extreme torments and pains. I didn't see who inflicted them on me, but, as it seemed to me, I felt myself burning and crumbling; and I repeat the worst was that interior fire and despair.
3. Being in such an unwholesome place, so unable to hope for any consolation, I found it impossible either to sit down or to lie down, nor was there any room, even though they put me in this kind of hole made in the wall. Those walls, which were terrifying to see, closed in on themselves and suffocated everything. There was no light, but all was enveloped in the blackest darkness. I don't understand how this could be, that everything painful to see was visible.
The Lord didn't want me to see any more of hell at that time. Afterward I saw another vision of frightful things, the punishment of some vices. With respect to the sight they seemed much more frightening, but since I didn't feel the pain, they didn't cause me so much fear. For in the former vision the Lord wanted me actually to feel those spiritual torments and afflictions, as though the body were suffering. I don't know how such an experience was possible, but I well understood that it was a great favor and that the Lord desired me to see with my own eyes the place His mercy had freed me from. It amounts to nothing to hear these pains spoken of, nor have I at other times thought about different torments (although not many, since my soul did not fare well with such fearful thoughts; that is, that devils tear off the flesh with pincers, or other various tortures I've read about) that are anything in comparison to this pain; it is something different. In sum, as a resemblance to the reality, being burned here on earth is very little when compared to being burned by the fire that is there.
4. I was left terrified, and still am now in writing about this almost six years later, and it seems to me that on account of the fear my natural heat fails me right here and now. Thus I recall no time of trial or suffering in which it doesn't seem to me that everything that can be suffered here on earth is nothing; so I think in a way we complain without reason. Hence I repeat that this experience was one of the greatest favors the Lord granted me because it helped me very much to lose fear of the tribulations and contradictions of this life as well as to grow strong enough to suffer them and give thanks to the Lord who freed me, as it now appears to me, from such everlasting and terrible evils.
5. Since that time, as I say, everything seems to me easy when compared to undergoing for a moment what I suffered there in hell. I marvel how after having often read books in which the pains of hell were somewhat explained I didn't fear them or take them for what they were. Where was I? How could I find relaxation in anything when I was causing myself to go to such an evil place? May You be blessed, my God, forever! How obvious it is that You loved me much more than I did myself! How many times, my Lord, have You freed me from so dark a prison, and how often have I put myself in it again against Your will!
6. From this experience also flow the great impulses to help souls and the extraordinary pain that is caused me by the many that are condemned (especially the Lutherans, for they were through baptism members of the Church). It seems certain to me that in order to free one alone from such appalling torments I would suffer many deaths very willingly. I notice that if we see a person, whom in a special way we love here below, with a great trial or suffering, it seems that our own very nature invites us to compassion; and if their trial is great, we ourselves become distressed. Well, who is there who can suffer seeing a soul in the supreme trial of trials that has no end? No heart can bear it without great pain. For if here on earth in knowing that finally life will end and that it has its limit, we are still moved to so much compassion, I don't know how we can rest in regard to the other endless life when we see how the devil brings so many souls each day with himself to hell.
7. This awareness also makes me desire that in a matter so important we don't grow satisfied with anything less than doing all we can on our part; let us neglect nothing, and may it please the Lord that He be served by giving us the grace to do all we can. I sometimes reflect that even though I was terribly wicked, I had some concern about serving God, that I didn't do certain things I see are done in the world as if they amount to nothing, and, finally, that I suffered great illnesses and with a lot of patience, which the Lord gave me, yet wasn't inclined to criticize or speak evil of anyone -- nor does it seem to me I could have wished evil on anyone. Neither was I covetous, nor do I ever recall being envious in such way that it would have been a grave offense against the Lord; and there are some other things -- for even though I was so wretched, I usually had the fear of God. Yet, in spite of all this, I see the place the devils had already prepared for me. Indeed, on account of my faults, it seems to me I still merited greater punishment. But, nonetheless, I say that it was a terrible torment and that it is a dangerous thing to be satisfied with ourselves, nor should the soul that falls at every step into mortal sin be at rest or content. But for the love of God we should avoid the occasions; the Lord will help us, as He did me. May it please His Majesty not to let me out of His hand lest I fall again, for I have already seen where I would end up. May the Lord not allow it because of who His Majesty is, amen.
8. After having seen this and other things and secrets that the Lord because of who He is, desired to show me about the glory He will give to the good and the suffering that will go to the evil, I was anxious to know the manner and way in which I could do penance for so much evil and merit something in order to gain so much good. I was desiring to flee people and withdraw completely from the world. My spirit was not at rest, yet the disquiet was not a disturbing but a delightful one. It was obvious that it was from God and that His Majesty had given the soul heat so as to digest other heavier foods than those it was eating.
9. I was thinking about what I could do for God, and I thought that the first thing was to follow the call to the religious life, which His Majesty had given me, by keeping my rule as perfectly as I could. Even though there were many servants of God in the house where I was, and He was very well served in it, the nuns because of great necessity often went out to places where they could stay -- with the decorum proper to religious. Also, the rule was not kept in its prime rigor, but was observed the way it was in the whole order, that is, according to the bull of mitigation. There were also other disadvantages; it seemed to me the monastery had a lot of comfort since it was a large and pleasant one. But this disadvantage of going out, even though I was one who did so a great deal, was now a serious one for me because some persons to whom the superiors couldn't say "no" liked to have me in their company; and when urged, the superiors ordered me to go. So, by reason of their command I wasn't able to remain in the monastery much. The devil must have helped partly to keep me from staying home; for since I was sharing with some of the nuns what those with whom I was consulting were teaching me, much good was being done.
10. It happened once while I was with someone that she mentioned to me and to the others in the group that if we couldn't be nuns like the discalced, it would still be possible to found a monastery. Since I was having these desires, I began to discuss the matter with that lady companion of mine, the widow I mentioned, who had the same desires. She began to draw up plans to provide the new house with income. Now I see that there was little chance these plans would succeed, but our desire made us think they would. Yet since, on the other hand, I was so perfectly content in the house in which I was because it was very much to my liking and the cell in which I lived was just what I wanted, I was still delaying. Nevertheless, we agreed to pray fervently to God over the matter.
11. One day after Communion, His Majesty earnestly commanded me to strive for this new monastery with all my powers, and He made great promises that it would be founded and that He would be highly served in it. He said it should be called St. Joseph and that this saint would keep watch over us at one door, and our Lady at the other, that Christ would remain with us, and that it would be a star shining with great splendor. He said that even though religious orders were mitigated one shouldn't think He was little served in them; He asked what would become of the world if it were not for religious and said that I should tell my confessor what He commanded, that He was asking him not to go against this or hinder me from doing it.
12. This vision had such great effects, and this locution the Lord granted was of such a nature, that I couldn't doubt it was from God. I felt the severest pain because on the one hand the terrible disturbances and trials the new monastery would cost me were partly represented to me, and on the other hand I was very happy in my own monastery. Although I had been discussing it before, I hadn't done so with as much determination or certitude as was necessary to bring it about. These words seemed to compel me, and since I saw I would be starting something that would disturb my calm, I was doubtful about what to do. But often the Lord returned to speak to me about this new monastery, presenting me with so many clear reasons and arguments that I saw it was His will, and I could no longer help but tell my confessor. I told him in writing all that happened.
13. He didn't dare tell me definitely to forget about the new monastery; but he was aware that it wasn't feasible from the viewpoint of natural reason since my companion who was the one who would have had to provide for the foundation had little or almost no possible means for it. He told me to discuss it with my superior and to do what the superior advised. I didn't discuss these visions with the superior, but that lady who wanted to found this monastery spoke with him. The provincial assented very readily, for he is fond of all religious life, and he gave all the necessary support and told her that he would accept that house under his jurisdiction. They discussed the income it would have to have, and for many reasons we never desired that it would have more than thirteen nuns.
Before we began to discuss it, we wrote to the holy friar Peter of Alcántara about everything that was happening. He counseled us not to fail to make the foundation, and he gave us his opinion about it all.
14. Hardly had the knowledge of it begun to spread throughout the city when the great persecution that cannot be briefly described came upon us: gossip, derision, saying that it was foolishness. As for me, they said I was well off in my own monastery; with regard to my companion, there was so much persecution that she became very upset. I didn't know what to do; it seemed to me they were partly right. While thus very wearied and recommending myself to God, His Majesty began to console and encourage me. He told me that in this I would see what the saints who had founded religious orders had suffered, that I would have to suffer much more persecution than I could imagine, and that we shouldn't let it bother us. He told me some things to tell my companion, and, what I marvelled at most, we were immediately consoled about what happened and were left with the courage to withstand all. Indeed, among people of prayer and, in fact, throughout the whole city there was hardly a person who was not then against us; the project seemed to almost everyone to be a lot of nonsense.
15. There was so much talk and such an outcry in my own monastery that the provincial thought it would be imprudent to go against all; so he changed his mind and didn't want to accept the foundation under his jurisdiction. He said the income was not secure, that it was small, and that there was strong opposition; and, all things considered, it seems he was right. Finally, he abandoned the project and refused to accept it. For us who, it seemed, had already received the first blows, the refusal was most painful; especially in my case, it was painful to see the provincial opposed to it; had he accepted it, I'd have been excused by all. As for my companion, they didn't want to give her absolution unless she gave up the idea, because they said she was obliged to remove the scandal.
16. She went to a most learned man, a very great servant of God of the order of St. Dominic, to tell him about it and give him an account of everything. She did this even before the provincial had withdrawn his permission, for in the entire place there was no one who wanted to give us an opinion; and thus it was said to be just one of our own whims. This lady told the holy man about everything and of the income she had from her estate. She had a strong desire that he would help us because he was the most learned man in the city at that time and there were few in his order more learned than he. I told him all we were thinking of doing and some of the reasons. I didn't say anything about any revelation but mentioned only the natural reasons that urged me, for I didn't want want him to give any opinion other than one in reply to those reasons. He told us to give him a period of eight days to answer and asked if we were determined to do what he would tell us. I told him we were. But even though I told him this and it seems to me I would have done so (although at that time I didn't see any other way of going forward with the project), never did the assurance leave me that the foundation would be made. My companion had more faith; she never for anything they said to her decided to abandon it.
17. Yet, as I say, I thought it would be impossible to give up the project. I believe that since it didn't go against Sacred Scripture or against the laws of the Church, which we are obliged to keep, the revelation was true. Although the undertaking really seemed to me to be from God, if that learned man had told me we couldn't do it without offending God and that we were doing something against the demands of a good conscience, I think I would have immediately given it up or sought another means. But the Lord didn't give me any other than this one.
This servant of God told me afterward that he had taken it upon himself and was fully determined to insist that we give up the foundation, for he had already heard news about the public outcry; also it seemed to him as it did to everyone to be foolish. And he went on that when a certain gentleman had learned we had gone to him, that gentleman informed him to be careful and not help us. But then when he began to consider how he would answer and to think about the matter and our intention and our plan of religious life, he felt assured it would be very much in the service of God and that we shouldn't fail to go ahead with it. So he answered us that we should hurry to bring the project to a conclusion, and he mentioned the manner and way in which it should be done. He said that although the estate was small, one had to trust in God about something, that anyone who would oppose the plan should come to him and that he would answer; in this way he always helped us, as I shall say afterward.
18. We were very consoled by his reply. On account of his help some holy persons who were usually opposed to us were more satisfied; and some helped us. Among them was the holy gentleman whom I already mentioned, who because he really was holy and it seemed to him that our plan bore promise of great perfection, since our whole basis for wanting to carry it out was prayer -- although the means seemed to him very difficult and impractical -- he gave his opinion that it could be something from God. It seemed the Lord Himself moved him to this. And the Lord did the same to the Master, who is the cleric, the servant of God I mentioned I had spoken to before, and who is an example to the entire city. He is a person whom God keeps there as a help and advantage for many souls, and now he agreed to help me in the project. Being at this juncture, always having the help of many prayers, and having already bought the house in a good section, I didn't worry about it being small. The Lord had told me to get started as best I could, that afterward I would see what His Majesty would do. And how well I have seen it! Thus, though I knew the income was small, I believed the Lord would help us and arrange things through other means.
