CHAPTER 33
 
Continues on the same subject, about the foundation dedicated to the glorious St. Joseph. Tells how she was ordered not to become involved with the project, of the time she abandoned it, of some trials she had, and of how the Lord consoled her.
 
1. Now then, when the business matters had reached this state and were at such a point that in another day the deeds were to be drawn up and the matter concluded, our Father Provincial changed his mind. I believe this was providential, as it appeared to be afterward. Since the prayers were so many, the Lord was perfecting the work and ordaining that it be done in another way. Because my provincial didn't want to receive the house under his jurisdiction, my confessor ordered me not to be involved with the foundation any more -- although the Lord knows the great trials and afflictions it had cost me to bring the project to that state. Even though my provincial had ordered me to do what I had done thus far, the conviction became greater that it was all the foolishness of women -- and the criticism of me increased -- when the endeavor was abandoned in this way.
2. I was very much disliked throughout my monastery because I had wanted to found a more enclosed monastery. They said I was insulting them; that in my own monastery I could also serve God since there were others in it better than I; that I had no love for the house; that it would be better to procure income for this place than for some other. Several of them said I should be thrown into the prison cell; others -- very few -- defended me somewhat. I saw clearly that in many matters my opponents were right, and sometimes I gave them explanations. Yet since I couldn't mention the main factor, which was that the Lord had commanded me to do this, I didn't know how to act; so I remained silent about the other things. God granted me the very great favor that none of all this disturbed me; rather, I gave up the plan with as much ease and contentment as I would have if it hadn't cost me anything. No one could believe this, not even the very persons of prayer who knew me. They thought I was very afflicted and ashamed; even my own confessor couldn't believe it. As for myself, since it seemed to me I had done everything I could, I thought I wasn't obliged to do what the Lord had commanded me; and I remained in the house, for I was very satisfied and pleased there. Although I could never stop believing that the foundation would come about, I no longer saw the means, nor did I know how or when; but I was very certain that it would.
3. What caused me great anguish was something my confessor once wrote to me. It was as though I had done something against his will. (The Lord also must have desired that in that area which would be most painful to me I wouldn't be lacking a trial). So in the midst of this multitude of persecutions, when I thought comfort would be coming from him, he wrote me that I should now be able to see from what had happened that the project had been all a dream, that I should make amends from then on by not desiring to go out for anything or to speak any more about it, since I had seen the scandal that had occurred; and he mentioned other things, all of them giving me pain. What he said grieved me more than everything else put together, since it seemed to me that if I had been an occasion or had been at fault for some offense against God, and that if these visions had been an illusion, all the prayer I had experienced was self-deception, and that I was being misled and going astray. This made me so extremely distressed I was thrown into complete confusion and severely afflicted. But the Lord, who never failed me, who in all these trials I enumerated often consoled and fortified me -- there is no reason to mention it all specifically here -- then told me not to be anxious; that I had served God a great deal and had not offended Him in that project; that I should do what my confessor ordered me to do by being silent for the present, until it would come time to return to the task. I was left so consoled and happy that the persecution hanging over me seemed to be all nothing.
4. In this way the Lord taught me what a tremendous good it is to suffer trials and persecutions for Him. For the increase of love of God I saw in my soul and many other things reached such a point that I was amazed; and this makes me unable to stop desiring trials. The other persons thought I was very ashamed; and yes, I would have been if the Lord hadn't favored me to such an extreme with so marvelous a gift. Then the impulses of love of God that I mentioned began to grow in intensity, and the raptures became greater, although I remained silent and didn't mention these gains. The holy Dominican friar still thought it certain, as I did, that the foundation would be made. Since I didn't want to get involved in it so as not to go against obedience to my confessor, he conferred about the matter with my companion; and they wrote to Rome to start negotiating for it.
5. Likewise the devil began striving here through one person and another to make known that I had received some revelation about this work. Some persons came to me with great fear to tell me we were in trouble and that it could happen that others might accuse me of something and report me to the Inquisitors. This amused me and made me laugh, for I never had any fear of such a possibility. If anyone were to see that I went against the slightest ceremony of the Church in a matter of faith, I myself knew well that I would die a thousand deaths for the faith or for any truth of Sacred Scripture. And I said they shouldn't be afraid about these possible accusations; that it would be pretty bad for my soul if there were something in it of the sort that I should have to fear the Inquisition; that I thought that if I did have something to fear I'd go myself to seek out the Inquisitors; and that if I were accused, the Lord would free me, and I would be the one to gain. I discussed this with my Dominican Father who, as I say, was so learned I was able to feel fully assured with what he told me. I told him then as clearly as I could about all the visions and my manner of prayer and the great favors the Lord granted me. I begged him to consider my prayer very carefully and tell me if there was something opposed to Sacred Scripture and what he felt about it all. He assured me very much, and, in my opinion, it benefited him. For although he was very good, from then on he dedicated himself much more to prayer and withdrew to a monastery of his order where there was much solitude so that he could practice prayer better. He remained there more than two years, but then obedience drew him out -- which he felt keenly -- since, on account of the kind of person he was, they needed him.
6. To a certain extent, because of the great loss this was to me, I felt it very much when he went away, although I didn't try to prevent him. But I understood what he gained; for when I was very troubled about his leaving, the Lord told me I should be consoled and not troubled, that he was being well guided. His soul improved so much in that place, and he made such spiritual progress, that he told me, when he came back, that he wouldn't have given up going there for anything in the world. And I, too, was able to agree because previously he assured me and consoled me only by his learning, but now he did so also through his spiritual experience, for he was receiving a number of supernatural experiences. And God brought him at the time that His majesty saw there was need for help in the work of founding this monastery which His Majesty desired.
7. Well, for five or six months I remained in this silence, not becoming involved in or speaking of this matter, and the Lord never commanded me to do so. I didn't understand why, but I couldn't get it out of my mind that the foundation would be accomplished. At the end of this period, when the rector of the house of the Society of Jesus was transferred, His Majesty brought here another very spiritual one who had great courage and understanding and a good background in studies, and at a time when I was in dire need. For since he who was my confessor had a superior, and members of the Society have this virtue to the extreme that they will not stir unless what they do is in conformity with their superior's will, he didn't dare, for sufficient reason that he had, come to a decision about some things, although he understood my spirit well and desired that it make much progress. And now my spirit was moving with such great impulses of love that it felt very keenly its bondage; nevertheless, it didn't venture beyond what he commanded me.
8. One day, while I was greatly troubled with the thought that my confessor didn't believe me, the Lord told me not to be anxious, that that affliction would soon end. I rejoiced deeply, thinking His words meant I was soon to die; and I became very happy when I thought about it. Afterward, I saw clearly they referred to the arrival of this rector I mentioned because the occasion for that pain never presented itself again. The new rector didn't restrain my confessor, but rather told him to console me; that there was no reason for fear, and not to lead me by so confining a path; that he should let the spirit of the Lord work, for at times it seemed with these great spiritual impulses that my soul couldn't even breathe.
9. This new rector came to see me. My confessor ordered me to speak to him in all freedom and clarity. I usually felt the greatest aversion toward speaking about myself. Thus it happened that when I entered the confessional, I felt in my spirit I don't know what that I never recall having felt with anyone, neither before nor afterward; nor would I be able to describe what this experience was, or draw any comparisons. For it was a spiritual joy and understanding within my soul that his soul would understand mine and that mine would be in harmony with his; although, as I say, I don't know how such an experience was possible. For if I had spoken with him or had heard enthusiastic reports about him, it wouldn't have been a great thing to experience joy in knowing he would understand me. But he hadn't spoken one word to me, nor I any to him, nor was he anyone of whom I had any previous knowledge. Afterward I saw that my spirit was not deceived, for in every way it did me and my soul great good to speak with him. His attitude is very suited to persons whom it seems the Lord has already brought very far along, for he makes them run rather than walk with measured step. His method is to detach them from everything and to mortify them, for the Lord has given him the most remarkable talent for doing this, as well as for many other things.
10. At the time of my initial conversations with him I immediately understood his style and saw that his soul was a pure and holy one and that he had a special gift from the Lord for discerning spirits. He consoled me very much. A little while after I had got to know him, the Lord began again to urge me to take up once more the matter of the monastery and to give my confessor and this rector many reasons and arguments why they shouldn't impede me from the work. Some of these reasons made them fear because this Father Rector never doubted the project was from the spirit of God, for through much study and care he considered all the consequences. After much reflection they didn't dare venture to hinder me from carrying out this work.
11. My confessor gave me permission again to dedicate myself entirely to this foundation. I saw clearly the toil it would bring upon me since I was very much alone and had hardly any means. We agreed to carry on in total secrecy, and so I got one of my sisters who lived outside this city to buy the house and fix it up, as though it were for herself, with money the Lord provided, in certain ways, for its purchase. It would take long to recount how the Lord was looking after it, for I took great care not to do anything against obedience. But I knew that if I said anything to my superiors, everything would be lost as happened the previous time, and things would even be worse. In procuring the money, acquiring the house, signing the contract for it, and fixing it up, I went through so many trials of so many kinds that now I'm amazed I was able to suffer them. In some of them I was completely alone; although my companion did what she could. But she could do little, and so little that it almost amounted to nothing more than to have everything done in her name and as her gift and all the rest of the trouble was mine. Sometimes in distress I said: "My Lord, how is it You command things that seem impossible? For if I were at least free, even though I am a woman! But bound on so many sides, without money or the means to raise it or to obtain the brief or anything, what can I do, Lord?"
12. Once when in need, for I didn't know what to do or how to pay some workmen, St. Joseph, my true father and lord, appeared to me and revealed to me that I would not be lacking, that I should hire them. And so I did, without so much as a penny, and the Lord in ways that amazed those who heard about it provided for me. The house struck me as being very small; so small that it didn't seem to be adequate for a monastery, and I wanted to buy another house next to it, which was also small, to serve as the church. I had no means or way of buying this nor did I know what to do. And one day after Communion, the Lord said to me: "I've already told you to enter as best you can." And by way of exclamation He added: "Oh, covetousness of the human race, that you think you will be lacking even ground! How many times did I sleep in the open because I had no place else!" I was astonished and saw that He was right. I went to the little house and drew up plans and found that although small it was perfect for a monastery, and I didn't bother about buying more property. But I arranged to have it fixed up so that it could be lived in -- with everything left rough and unpolished -- and likewise so that it would not be harmful to health. And this is the way these things should be done always.
13. On her feastday, while I was going to Communion, St. Clare appeared to me with striking beauty. She told me to take courage and to continue on with what I had begun, that she would help me. I became very devoted to her; and what she said has indeed come true, for a nearby monastery of nuns of her order helps sustain us. What is more important is that little by little she brought this desire of mine to such perfection that the poverty the blessed saint practiced in her house is practiced in this one, and we are living on alms. For it had cost me no small amount of trouble that this observance of poverty would have all the backing and authority of the Holy Father behind it so that no one could change it and that there never be any income. And the Lord does more, and it must perhaps be through the prayers of this blessed saint, for without any request His Majesty fully provides what is necessary for us. May He be blessed forever, amen.
14. On one of these same days, the feast of the Assumption of our Lady while at a monastery of the order of the glorious St. Dominic, I was reflecting upon the many sins I had in the past confessed in that house and many things about my wretched life. A rapture came upon me so great that it almost took me out of myself. I sat down; it still seems to me I couldn't see the elevation or hear Mass, and afterward I had a scruple about this. It seemed to me while in this state that I saw myself vested in a white robe of shining brightness, but at first I didn't see who was clothing me in it. Afterward I saw our Lady at my right side and my father St. Joseph at the left, for they were putting that robe on me. I was given to understand that I was now cleansed of my sins. After being clothed and while experiencing the most marvelous delight and glory, it seemed to me then that our Lady took me by the hands. She told me I made her very happy in serving the glorious St. Joseph, that I should believe that what I was striving for in regard to the monastery would be accomplished, that the Lord and those two would be greatly served in it, that I shouldn't fear there would ever be any failure in this matter even though the obedience which was to be given was not to my liking, because they would watch over us, and that her Son had already promised us He would be with us, that as a sign that this was true she was giving me a jewel. It seemed to me she placed around my neck a very beautiful golden necklace to which was attached a highly valuable cross. This gold and these stones are incomparably different from earthly ones. Their beauty is very different from what is imaginable here below. And the intellect cannot attain to an understanding of the nature of the robe that the Lord desires to have represented, nor can one imagine its whiteness; everything here on earth in comparison is like a sketch made from soot, so to speak.
15. The beauty I saw in our Lady was extraordinary, although I didn't make out any particular details except the form of her face in general and that her garment was of the most brilliant white, not dazzling but soft. I didn't see the glorious St. Joseph so clearly, although I saw indeed that he was there, as in the visions I mentioned that are not seen. Our Lady seemed to me to be a very young girl. They were with me a little while; and I was in a state of wonderful glory and happiness, which in my opinion I had never experienced and which I did not want to see come to an end; then it seemed to me I saw them ascend to heaven with a great multitude of angels. I was left in deep loneliness, although so consoled and elevated and recollected in prayer and moved to love that I remained some time without being able to stir or speak, but almost outside myself. I was left with a great impulse to be dissolved for God and with similar effects. And everything happened in such a way that I could never doubt, no matter how much I tried, that the vision was from God. It left me very comforted and with great peace.
16. As for what the Queen of Angels said concerning obedience, it pertained to the fact that it distressed me not to give obedience to the order, but the Lord had told me it wasn't suitable to give it to my superiors. He gave me the reasons why it would in no way be fitting that I do so. But He told me I should petition Rome in a certain way, which He also indicated to me, and that He would take care that we get our request. And so it came about, for the petition was made the way the Lord told me and it was granted easily, whereas we had been unable to obtain it. Because of some things that happened afterward it was very fortunate the obedience was given to the bishop. But at that time I wasn't acquainted with the prelate, nor did I know who he would be. The Lord willed that he be an excellent one and that he be strongly in favor of this house, as was necessary because of the great opposition there was to it, as I shall say afterward, and in order that it be established in its present state. May He be blessed who in this way did everything, amen.

CHAPTER 34
 
Discusses how at this time it was opportune for her to leave the city. Tells about the reason and how her superior ordered her to go to console a lady of the nobility who was very distressed. Begins to deal with what happened there and the great favor the Lord granted her in making her the means by which he awakened a very eminent person to serve Him wholeheartedly, and how afterward she had this person's support and favor. The chapter is most important.
 
1. Well no matter how careful I was that this work be secret, I couldn't keep it all so hidden that there wouldn't be those persons who would find out about it; some believed what they heard, others didn't. I feared a great deal that if someone should tell the provincial when he came, he would order me not to continue; and immediately the whole thing would have to stop. The Lord provided in this way. It happened that in a large city, more than twenty leagues from here, a lady was very grieved because of the death of her husband. Her distress had reached such an extreme that they feared for her health. She had heard news about this little sinner, for the Lord had so arranged matters that for the sake of other blessings that would follow they spoke highly to her about me. This lady was well acquainted with the provincial, and since she was a person of the nobility and knew I was in a monastery where the nuns were allowed to go out, the Lord gave her a strong, irresistible desire to see me; she thought I would be able to console her. She immediately tried by every means she could to bring me there, and to this effect sent a message to the provincial who was far away. He sent me an order, under precept of obedience, to go immediately with another companion. I learned of it on Christmas eve.
2. It caused me some disturbance and a lot of affliction to know that she wanted to bring me there because she thought there was some good in me, for since I knew I was so wretched I couldn't bear such a thought. Praying to God very earnestly about this, I spent all of Matins, or a great part of it, in a deep rapture. The Lord told me to go and not listen to opinions, because few would counsel me prudently; that even though I would have trials, God would be greatly served; that for the business concerning the monastery it was fitting I be absent until the brief arrive because the devil had set up a cunning plot for when the provincial would return; that I shouldn't fear anything; that He would help me there. I was very much strengthened and consoled. I told the rector about it. He told me I should by no means fail to go. For others told me that I shouldn't abide by the provincial's letter, that it was the invention of the devil so that some harm could come to me there; that I should write back to the provincial.
3. I obeyed the rector, and with what I had learned in prayer I went without fear, although not without sheer embarrassment in considering the title under which they were bringing me there and how much they were being deceived. This made me beg the Lord more that He not abandon me. I was very consoled that there was a house of the Society of Jesus in that city where I was going and that by submitting to their orders as I did here I would, I thought, have some security. It pleased the Lord that that lady was so comforted she soon began to improve noticeably, and each day she found herself more at ease. She valued this improvement highly because, as I said, the suffering had weighed on her heavily. And the Lord must have done this through the many prayers good persons I knew offered in order that things would turn out well for me. She was very God-fearing and so good that her abundant Christian spirit supplied for what was lacking in me. She grew deeply fond of me. I esteemed her very much in observing her goodness. But almost everything was a cross for me because the comforts caused me great torment, and I was very fearful about the big fuss made over me. My soul was so dispirited I didn't dare grow negligent, nor did the Lord neglect me; while I was there He granted me the most wonderful favors. These gave me such freedom and made me so despise all that I saw -- and the greater the favors, the greater the contempt -- that I conversed with those noble ladies, whom it would have been an honor for me to serve, with the freedom I would have felt had I been their equal.
4. I derived a very beneficial insight, and I told her about it. I realized that she was a woman and as subject to passions and weaknesses as I, and how little should be our esteem for the status of nobility, and that the greater the nobility the more the cares and trials. I observed the solicitude they had for preserving their composure in conformity with this status, which doesn't allow them to live, obliging them to eat without rhyme or reason because everything must be done in accordance with their status and not with their bodily constitution. (They have often to eat food that is more in harmony with their position than with their liking). As a result I totally abhorred any desire to become a lady of the nobility -- God deliver me from faulty composure! -- even though I believe there are few women more humble or of greater simplicity than this lady who is one of the most noble in the kingdom. I pitied her and felt it when I saw how often she had to go against her inclination in order to fulfill the duties of her state. As for the servants, what they can be trusted with amounts to little, even though she had good ones. You dare not speak to one more than to the other, or else the one you favor will be disliked by the others. This is a kind of subservience that makes calling such persons "lords" one of the world's lies, for it doesn't seem to me they are anything but slaves to a thousand things.
5. The Lord was pleased that while I stayed at that house the persons who lived in it improved in their service of His Majesty, although I wasn't free of some trials and some envy on the part of a few because of the great love that lady had for me. They perhaps must have thought I was aiming after some personal advantage. The Lord most probably allowed them to provide me with some trials and similar things as well as other things of another kind so that I wouldn't be charmed by the comfort I likewise experienced, and He was pleased to draw me out of it all with improvement for my soul.
6. While I was there it happened that a certain religious came to that city, a person from the nobility with whom I had sometimes conversed many years previously. Once, when attending Mass at a monastery of his order near the place where I was staying, there came over me a desire to know the condition of his soul since I wanted him to be a great servant of God; and I rose to go to speak to him. Since I was already recollected in prayer, it seemed to me after I got up that it was a waste of time, and I wondered why I should meddle, and returned to my seat. It seems to me that this happened three times, and finally, the good angel was more powerful than the bad; I went to call him, and he came to speak with me in the confessional. We began to question each other -- for it was many years since we had met -- about our lives. I began to tell him I had experienced many trials of soul. He strongly urged me to tell him what the trials were. I told him they were not meant to be known nor was it meant that I should speak of them. He said that since the Dominican Father I mentioned -- who was a great friend of his -- knew about them he would find out from him and that I shouldn't worry about it.
7. The fact is that neither was it in his power to stop pressing me nor was it in mine, it seems to me, to resist speaking about them. For despite all the displeasures and shame I usually felt when I spoke about these things, I didn't feel any pain with him or with the rector I mentioned; rather, I was very much consoled. I told him about them under the seal of confession. He seemed to me wiser than ever, although I always thought he had a great mind. I considered the wonderful talents and gifts he had for doing much good, were he to give himself totally to God. I've experienced this for some years: as soon as I see a person who greatly pleases me, with longings I sometimes cannot bear, I want to see him give himself totally to God. And although I desire that all serve God, the longings come with very great impulses in the case of these persons I like; so I beg the Lord very much on their behalf. With the religious I'm speaking of, it so happened to me.
8. He asked me to pray earnestly to God for him, but he had no need to ask since I was already of such a mind that I couldn't have done otherwise. I went to the place where I usually prayed alone and being deeply recollected, began to talk to the Lord in a foolish way, which I often do without knowing what I'm saying. It is love that is then speaking, and the soul is so transported that I don't notice the difference there is between it and God. Love that knows it possesses His Majesty forgets the soul and thinks it is in Him and, as one without division, speaks absurdities. I recall that after having begged Him with many tears for that soul, that it be truly committed to His service, I said that even though I considered him good this didn't satisfy me, since I wanted him to be very good; and so I said to His Majesty: "Lord, You must not deny me this favor; see how this individual is fit to be our friend."
9. O goodness and great humanity of God! You don't look at the words but at the desires and the will with which they are spoken! How do You bear that one like myself should speak so boldly to Your Majesty! May You be blessed forever and ever.
10. I recall that in those hours of prayer that night there came over me a great affliction in wondering whether I was at enmity with God. Since I couldn't know whether I was in grace or not (not that I wanted to know, but that I desired to die so as not to find myself in a life where I wasn't sure whether or not I was dead -- for there couldn't have been a more grievous death for me than to wonder whether I had offended God), this pain oppressed me. All overflowing and dissolved in tears, I begged God not to permit me to be without grace. Then I understood that I could truly be consoled and certain that I was in grace because a love of God like this, and those favors and sentiments His Majesty gave me, could not exist harmoniously with a soul in mortal sin. I remained confident the Lord would grant what I begged of Him for this person. He told me some words to tell him. I greatly disliked doing this because I didn't know how to say them. This matter of giving a message to a third party, as I said, is what I always dislike most; especially in this case since I didn't know how the person would take it, or if he would make fun of me. I got very distressed about it. Finally, I became so persuaded that I believe I promised God I wouldn't fail to tell this person; because of my great embarrassment, I put the words in writing and gave them to him.
11. They indeed seemed to be from God on account of the effect they had upon him. He resolved very sincerely to dedicate himself to prayer, even though he didn't do so at once. Since the Lord had wanted this person for Himself, He sent him some truths by means of me, which, without my understanding them, were so apropos that they amazed him. And the Lord must have disposed him to believe they were from His Majesty. I, although wretched, begged the Lord intensely to convert this individual to Himself completely, and to make him abhor the satisfactions and things of life. Consequently -- may God be praised forever! -- he turned to God so completely that every time he speaks to me, I'm stupefied. If I hadn't seen it, I would have doubted that in such a short time the favors would have so increased and he would have been so occupied with God that he no longer seemed to live for anything else on earth. May His Majesty protect him, for if he continues to advance like this (which I hope in the Lord he will since he is well grounded in self-knowledge), he will become one of God's most distinguished servants for the great benefit of many souls. Within a short time he has had much experience in spiritual things; these are gifts God gives when he desires and how He desires, and they depend neither on time nor on services. I do not mean that time and services are not important, but often the contemplation the Lord doesn't give to one in twenty years He gives to another in one. His Majesty knows the reason. This is a mistake we make: we think that with years we shall come to understand what in no way can be comprehended without experience. And so many are wrong, as I said, in wanting to discern spirits without having experience. I don't say that anyone who has not had spiritual experience, provided he is a learned man, should not guide someone who has. But he ought to limit himself to seeing to it that in both exterior and interior matters the soul walks in conformity to the natural way through the use of reason; and in supernatural experiences he should see that it walks in conformity with Sacred Scripture. As for the rest he shouldn't kill himself or think he understands what he doesn't, or suppress the spirit; for now, in respect to the spirit, another greater Lord governs them; they are not without a Superior.
12. Let him not be surprised or think these things are impossible -- everything is possible with the Lord -- but strive to strengthen his own faith and humble himself in that the Lord makes a little old woman wiser, perhaps, in this science than he is, even though he is a very learned man. With his humility he will do more good for souls and for himself than by becoming a contemplative without it. For I repeat that if he doesn't have experience and a very great deal of humility in knowing that he doesn't understand the experience, but that it's not impossible on that account, he will be of little profit to himself and of still less profit to those with whom he deals. If he's humble, he shouldn't fear that the Lord will allow either of them to be deceived.
13. The Lord gave humility in many things to this Dominican Father of whom I'm speaking. As a result this Father strove to learn through study everything he could in this matter, for he is a good scholar. And what he doesn't know through experience he finds out from one who has it. Thus the Lord helps him by giving him deep faith, and so this Father has himself profited very much and has helped other souls; and mine is one of them. It seems that, since His Majesty was about to call to Himself some who were guiding me, He provided that there be others to help me through difficult troubles and do me great good. The Lord changed him almost completely, in such a way that he hardly knew himself, so to speak; and the Lord gave him bodily strength for penance (which he didn't have before, but was sickly), and courage for everything good, and other things. It indeed seems to have been a very particular call from the Lord. May He be blessed forever.
14. I believe all the good comes to this Father from the favors the Lord granted him in prayer, for this good is not counterfeit. Already in some things the Lord has desired that he be tried, and he has come out of these trials as one who has already learned about the merit gained in suffering persecutions. I hope in the greatness of the Lord that through him much good will come to some persons of his order and to the order itself. This is already beginning to be known. I have seen great visions, and the Lord has told me some highly admirable things about him and about the rector of the Society of Jesus, whom I mentioned, and about two other religious of the order of St. Dominic -- especially about one of them, for His Majesty has already made known in deed some things having to do with his progress that I had known previously. But of the one of whom I'm now speaking many things have been manifested to me.
15. Now I want to say one thing here: I was once with him in a parlor and my soul and spirit came to such an understanding of the great love of God that burned in his spirit that this knowledge almost absorbed me, for I was considering the grandeur of God who in so short a time had raised a soul to such a high state. It made me very embarrassed because I saw him listening with so much humility to some things I was saying about prayer and saw that I had little of it to be speaking in such a way with a person like this. The Lord must have suffered it because of the strong desire I had to see this person far advanced. It benefited me so much to be with him that it seems he left my soul fired anew with the desire to serve the Lord from the beginning. O my Jesus, what a soul inflamed in Your love accomplishes! How highly we must esteem such a soul and how we must beg the Lord to let it remain in this life! Whoever has this same love must follow after these souls if possible.
16. It is a wonderful thing when a sick person finds another wounded with that same sickness; how great the consolation to find you are not alone. The two become a powerful help to each other in suffering and meriting. What excellent backing they give to one another since they are determined to risk a thousand lives for God and they desire the opportunities for losing them. They are like soldiers who want to make war in order to capture the spoils and become rich; they have understood that such riches cannot be acquired any other way. This is their duty: to labor. Oh, what a great thing it is when the Lord gives this light to understand the abundance that is gained in suffering for Him! This isn't well understood until one abandons all for Him. For those who rest in something show that they esteem it; surely if they esteem it they will be sorry to give it up -- and already everything is going imperfectly and astray. The saying fits well here that the lost go after what is lost. And what greater perdition, greater blindness, greater misfortune than to cherish that which is nothing?
17. Well, to return to what I was saying, while with the deepest joy I was contemplating that soul, it seems the Lord wanted me to see clearly the treasures He had placed in it. Seeing the favor He granted me in that He used me as a means -- though I found myself unworthy to be such -- I had higher esteem for the favors the Lord granted this soul and considered them more my own then if they had been given to me. I praised His Majesty upon seeing that He was fulfilling my desires and had heard my prayer, which was that the Lord awaken persons like these. My soul being then in such a state that it couldn't bear so much joy, it went out of itself and was lost, so the more to gain. The reflections were forgotten, and while I was hearing that divine language in which it seems the Holy Spirit was speaking, a powerful rapture came over me which almost made me lose my senses, although it lasted only for a short while. I saw Christ with awesome majesty and glory showing great happiness over what was taking place. Thus He told me and wanted me to see clearly that He was always present in conversations like these and how much He is pleased when persons so delight in speaking of him.
At another time, I saw this Father, when he was away from this place, raised up by angels in great glory. Through this vision I understood that his soul was making much progress. Thus it happened that serious testimony against his honor was given by a person for whom he had done much good by providing a remedy for this person's soul and own loss of honor. He underwent this with great happiness, performed other works of much service to God, and suffered other persecutions.
18. It doesn't seem to me fitting now to describe anything more. If afterward, since you know about these things, your Reverence should think it is indeed appropriate, they can be put down for the glory of the Lord. What I said about the prophecies concerning this house, and other prophecies I shall mention, as well as other things, were all fulfilled. Some the Lord told me three years before they came about -- others more than three, other less. I always told them to my confessor and to this widow friend of mine whom I had permission to tell, as I said. I have known that she has told them to other persons, and these persons know I am not lying; nor may God ever permit me to lie, for in no instance would I speak anything but the complete truth -- and how much more in matters so serious.
19. When a brother-in-law of mine died suddenly and I was deeply grieved because he hadn't had the chance to go to confession, it was told to me in prayer that my sister would die this way, that I should go to her and try to get her to prepare herself for such an event. I told my confessor and since he didn't allow me to go, I heard the message at other times. When he learned of this, he told me to go there, and that there was nothing to lose. She lived in a small village; I went and, without telling her about the locution, enlightened her as I could about everything and got her to confess very frequently and in all events to take care of her soul. She was very good and she did so. Within four or five years after she had gained this habit and become very conscientious, she died without seeing anyone or being able to confess. Happily, since she had acquired the habit, little more than eight days had passed since she had gone to confession. News of her death brought me great joy. She remained a very short time in purgatory. I don't think more than eight days passed when the Lord appeared to me after I received Communion and wanted me to see how He brought her to glory. In all those years from the time He told me until she died, I didn't forget what had been made known to me, nor did my companion; as soon as my sister died, my companion came to me very much amazed to see how the revelation had been fulfilled. May God be praised forever who takes such care of souls so that they be not lost.

CHAPTER 35
 
Continues on the same subject: the foundation of this house of our glorious father St. Joseph. Tells of the means the Lord provided by which holy poverty would be observed in it, the reason why she left the lady she was staying with and returned, and of some other things that happened to her.
 
1. Well, while I was with this lady I mentioned, with whom I stayed more than a half year, the Lord ordained that a beata of our order who lived more than seventy leagues from here should find out about me. She decided to come here, making a detour of several leagues, to speak to me. The Lord had inspired her the same year and month He did me to found another monastery of this order. As soon as He gave her this desire, she sold all that she had and walked to Rome barefoot to get a patent for it.
2. She is a woman who practices much penance and prayer; the Lord has granted her many favors, and our blessed Lady appeared to her and ordered her to make the foundation. She was so far ahead of me in serving the Lord that I was ashamed to stand in her presence. She showed me the patent letters she brought from Rome, and during the fifteen days she stayed with me we arranged how we should go about founding these monasteries. Until I had spoken to her, it hadn't been brought to my notice that our rule -- before it was mitigated -- ordered that we own nothing, nor had I been about to found the house without an income. My intention had been that we have no worries about our needs; I hadn't considered the many cares ownership of property brings with it. Since the Lord had taught her, this holy woman understood well, without knowing how to read, what I, after having read over our constitutions so often, didn't know. As she told me about it, it seemed to me to be right, although I feared they wouldn't allow me, but say I was doing something foolish and that I shouldn't do a thing that would make others suffer on my account. Had I been alone it would not have held me back either little or much; rather it would have been a great pleasure for me to think I was keeping the counsels of Christ, our Lord, since His Majesty had already given me great desires for poverty. Thus I didn't doubt that poverty was the best thing for me, because for a long time I had been desiring that it would be possible for me to go begging for love of God and not have a house or anything. But I feared that if the Lord didn't give the others these desires, their lives would be unhappy. I also feared that poverty would be the cause of some distraction since I observed certain poor monasteries in which there wasn't much recollection. I failed to reflect that this lack of recollection was the cause of their being poor and that it was not the practice of poverty that caused their distraction. For distraction won't make monasteries richer; nor does God ever fail anyone who serves Him. In sum, I had weak faith, which was not true of this servant of God.
3. Since I consulted in all things with so many, I nonetheless found almost no one with this opinion, neither my confessor nor the learned men with whom I dealt. They brought out so many reasons against poverty that I didn't know what to do. Since I knew it was in the rule and saw that observing poverty would be more perfect, I couldn't persuade myself that the monastery should have an income. And if sometimes they had me convinced, when I returned to prayer and contemplating Christ on the cross, so poor and so naked, I couldn't patiently accept the idea of being rich. I tearfully begged Him to ordain things so that I would see myself poor, as He was.
4. I found so many disadvantages in having an income and saw it would be so great a cause of disquiet and even distraction that I did nothing else but dispute with learned men. I wrote about it to the Dominican religious who was helping us. He sent me two pages with objections and theology written on both sides on why I shouldn't do it, and he told me he had studied the matter very carefully. I answered him that I didn't want to benefit from theology if it wasn't conducive to my following my vocation, my vow of poverty, and the counsels of Christ with total perfection, and that in this case he did me no favor with his learning. If I found some person who would help me, I became very happy. That lady with whom I was staying was a great help to me in this matter. Some told me in the beginning that the idea seemed to them good; afterward, as they began to reflect about it, they found so many disadvantages that they returned to insist on my not carrying it out. I told them that, since they were so quick to change their opinion, I preferred to follow the first.
5. At this time, since this lady hadn't seen the holy Friar Peter of Alcántara, the Lord was pleased through my entreaties that he come to her house. Because he was a true lover of poverty and had practiced it for so many years, he knew well the riches that lay within it; so he helped me a great deal and ordered that I should by no means fail to go through with my plan. With this favorable opinion from one who could give the best opinion since he had known about poverty through wide experience, I made up my mind not to go looking for other opinions.
6. One day while praying intensely to God about this matter, the Lord told me I shouldn't in any way fail to found the monastery in poverty, that this was both the will of His Father and His own, that He would help me. This took place during a deep rapture with so many remarkable effects that I couldn't have any doubt the desire was from God.
Another time He told me an income would cause disturbance of mind, and added other things in favor of poverty, assuring me that whoever would observe it would not lack the necessities of life; this lack, as I say, I never feared for myself. The Lord also changed the heart of the presentado, I mean of the Dominican I mentioned who had written to me that I shouldn't found the monastery without income. I was very happy to hear this then and to have these opinions. It seemed to me I possessed all the world's riches in resolving to live by the love of God.
7. At this time, since there was going to be an election in my monastery, my provincial lifted his command and the obedience he had placed me under to stay with this lady, and he left it up to me to choose whether to return or to remain with her for awhile. Some sent me the news that many wanted to give me the charge of being superior. Merely to think of such a thing was a terrible torment. Whereas I was determined to suffer easily any martyrdom for God, by no artifice could I persuade myself to suffer this one. Besides the great amount of work (there were many nuns) and other reasons for which I never liked the thought of having any office, it seemed to me that being superior would be very dangerous for my conscience; so I praised God I wasn't there. I wrote to my friends not to vote for me.
8. While I was very happy that I wasn't in the midst of all that clatter, the Lord told me I should by no means fail to go, that since I desired the cross a good one was ready for me, that I shouldn't reject it, that I ought to go with courage, that He would help me, and that I must go right away. I became very disturbed and didn't do anything but weep, for I thought the cross meant I would be elected superior; and, as I say, I couldn't be persuaded that such an office would be any good for my soul -- nor did I find in myself the qualifications. I gave an account of all to my confessor. He told me I should thus try to go, that it would be clearly the more perfect thing to do, and that since it was very hot it would be sufficient for me to be there for the election, and that I could wait some days before going so as not to get sick from the journey. But the Lord had ordained otherwise, and so things came about.
Interiorly I was extremely restless, and I couldn't practice prayer. It seemed to me I was failing to do what the Lord had commanded me and that, since I was in that place to my own liking and pleasure, I didn't want to go to offer myself to the trial; that I was all words with God and that, since I could be there where it would be more perfect for me to be, I had to ask why I was failing to go; that if I should die, I should die! Along with all this went a constriction of soul, and the Lord took away all satisfaction in prayer. In sum, I was in such a state and so severely tormented that I asked that lady to be good enough to let me go. Already my confessor -- since he saw me in this state -- had told me to go, for God likewise moved him as He did me.
9. She so regretted my leaving her that her sorrow was another torment for me. It had cost her very much, many kinds of urgent pleas, to get permission from the provincial to have me with her. Thus it was a most difficult thing for her to let me go, and she felt it keenly. But since she was very God-fearing and I told her, in addition to many other things, that my going could render God great service, and I gave her the hope it would be possible for me to return to see her, she accepted the fact of my leaving -- although regretfully.
10. I no longer was sorry to go; once I understood it was something more perfect and that it would render greater service to God, by means of the happiness it gives me to please Him, I was able to endure the pain of leaving that lady who I saw felt the separation so deeply and other persons whom I owed a great deal, especially my confessor, who was from the Society of Jesus, and with whom I got along very well. But the more I saw I was losing consolation for the Lord's sake, the happier I became at losing it. I couldn't understand how this was possible, because I saw clearly these two contraries: my being pleased and consoled and happy over what weighed upon my soul. For I had been consoled and at peace there and had found time for many hours of prayer. I saw I was about to place myself in a fire, for the Lord had already told me I was going to undergo a great cross, although I never thought it would be as great as I afterward found out it was. Nonetheless, I was happy in going; and since the Lord had desired me to go, I was disturbed that I hadn't entered the battle immediately. Thus His Majesty sent strength and placed it in the midst of my weakness.
11. I wasn't able, as I say, to understand how these contraries were possible. I thought of this comparison: Were I to possess a jewel, or something else that gave me great happiness, and then to find out that one whom I loved and wanted to please more than myself desired that object, my happiness in going without it would be greater than in possessing it if I made that other person happy: And because the happiness in pleasing the other would surpass my first happiness, it would take away any pain I might feel in the lack of the jewel, or of the thing cherished, or in losing the happiness it gave me. Thus, though I wanted to feel distress upon seeing that I was leaving persons from whom I so much regretted being separated (and I am by nature so grateful that at another time this would have been enough to cause me deep affliction), now, even though I wanted to feel it, I couldn't.
12. It was so important, as regards the business of this holy house, for me not to have delayed a day longer that I don't know how I might have brought things to a conclusion if I had then stayed on there. O greatness of God! Often I am amazed when I consider how particularly His Majesty wanted to help me found this little dwelling corner for God. I believe this is what it is; it is an abode in which His Majesty delights, for He once said to me while I was in prayer that this house was a paradise of delight for Him. And thus it seems His Majesty has selected the souls He has brought to this monastery. I live in their company very, very much ashamed. I wouldn't have known how to desire for this purpose souls such as these; so austere, poor, and prayerful. And they bear this austerity with a joy and happiness that makes each one feel unworthy to have deserved to come to a place like this. There are some, especially, whom the Lord called out of a world of much vanity and ostentation where they could have been satisfied in conformity with its laws. And the Lord has so doubled their joys in this house that they realized clearly He has given them a hundred joys for every one they left. And they can't get enough of thanking His Majesty. With others, He has changed what was good into something better. To those who are young He gives fortitude and knowledge so that they are unable to desire anything else, and they understand that to be detached from all the things of life is to live in the greatest calm, even in regard to earthly things. To those who are older and have poor health He gives strength, and He gives them the power to bear the austerity and penance the others do.
13. O my Lord, how obvious it is that You are almighty! There's no need to look for reasons for what You want. For, beyond all natural reason, You make things so possible that You manifest clearly there's no need for anything more than truly to love You and truly to leave all for You, so that You, my Lord, may make everything easy. It fits well here to say that You feign labor in Your law. For I don't see, Lord, nor do I know how the road that leads to You is narrow. I see that it is a royal road, not a path; a road that is safer for anyone who indeed takes it. Very far off are the occasions of sin, those narrow mountain passes and the rocks that make one fall. What I would call a path, a wretched path and a narrow way, is the kind which has on one side, where a soul can fall, a valley far below, and on the other side a precipice: as soon as one becomes careless one is hurled down and broken into pieces.
14. They who really love You, my Good, walk safely on a broad and royal road. They are far from the precipice. Hardly have they begun to stumble when You, Lord, give them Your hand. One fall is not sufficient for a person to be lost, nor are many, if they love You and not the things of the world. They journey in the valley of humility. I cannot understand what it is that makes people afraid of setting out on the road of perfection. May the Lord, because of who He is, give us understanding of how wretched is the security that lies in such manifest dangers as following the crowd and how true security lies in striving to make progress on the road of God. Let them turn their eyes to Him and not fear the setting of this Sun of Justice, nor, if we don't first abandon Him, will He allow us to walk at night and go astray.
15. They aren't afraid to walk among lions (by which I mean whatever the world calls honors, delights, and similar pleasures) where it seems each lion would want to tear off a piece of them; and here on this road it seems the devil makes them afraid of field mice. A thousand times do I marvel and ten thousand times would I like to find satisfaction in bewailing and crying out to everyone my great blindness and wickedness so that doing this might help them open their eyes. May anyone who can, through God's goodness, open them; and may He not permit me to become blind, amen.

