To the Very Magnificent and Reverend Señor Padre Ordóñez of the Society of Jesus, my lord.
1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor. I would like to have a good deal of time and health to mention some things that, in my opinion, are important. But I am in such a state that, after the departure of the young lad, I got even worse than before, incomparably so. Just writing this will cost me much effort. And I get so tediously long that, however much I may want to keep this short, I will go on at length. This house of the Incarnation is noticeably bad for my health. Please God some merit will come from my being here.
2. Since this matter of ours seems to be nearing the decisive step, I have become much more concerned, especially after seeing our Father Visitator's letter today, in which he refers the matter to Padre Maestro Fray Domingo and me. He writes to transfer his powers in this regard to us. I am always apprehensive in matters in which I have to decide; it seems at once that I am going to make a mistake over the whole thing. It is true that beforehand I had recommended everything to the Lord, and they have done so here.
3. It seems to me, mi padre, that we have to look carefully at all the drawbacks, for if the thing doesn't work out, you and I will be held responsible before God and the world -- have no doubt about it. Therefore don't bother about whether the matter is concluded in more or less than fifteen days. What you say in your letter about the prioress made me happy, that she should not become involved in the matter except in the two areas you specified. For, believe me, it is very necessary to proceed in such a way that to achieve one good we do not remove another, as you say.
4. As for there being so many, as you often said, this has displeased me. I know there is as much difference between teaching young women together and teaching young men as there is between black and white. And if we want to do something good, there are so many disadvantages in a large number that I am not able to recount them now. I only say that the number should be fixed, and if it passes forty, that will mean too many, and things will become chaotic, with some of them disturbing others so that no good will come from it. In Toledo, I found out, there are thirty-five, and that is the limit. I tell you that in no way is it necessary or suitable to have so many young women and so much noise. And if on this account some do not want to give alms, proceed slowly, for there is no rush, and seek to form a holy community, for God will help you; we must not fail in substantial matters for the sake of alms.
5. In choosing those suitable for entering, it will also be necessary to have two other votes besides that of the prioress. One should be very careful on this point. If the prior of San Andrés accepts this task, it would not be a bad thing; he could have an administrator or be administrator himself along with another. They would take care of the record of expenditures, for the prioress should not get involved in this -- neither see it nor hear about it -- as I said before. It will be necessary to consider the qualities required of those who will be entering and the number of years they expect to remain. You and Padre Maestro could look into that; and everything you submit to him should first be presented for consultation to Father Provincial of the Society of Jesus and to Padre Baltasar Alvarez.
6. Many other things will be necessary, but we've already dealt there with some, especially not going out. Those that seem to me extremely important are the first two, for I have experience of what it is for many women to be together -- God deliver us!
7. With respect to what you say -- I think the prioress has written me concerning it -- about not getting free of the rent payment for now, you should understand that Lady Doña Jerónima cannot enter, nor do I have the authority to allow her to enter, without her first getting rid of the mortgage. Or Señora Doña Elena should assume it as a part of her estate, in such a way that the monastery doesn't waste a thing on paying rent and remains free. I know that Father Provincial gave permission only on this condition, and not to respect it would be deceptive, in my opinion. In sum, I cannot do it. I can well see how all of this is a heavy burden for Señora Doña Elena. But there's a way out: she can delay work on the church, or Señora Doña Jerónima need not enter so quickly. The latter is preferable, for she would be older.
8. The thought comes to mind that we ought not build too much on a foundation that may crumble, for we don't know if this lady will persevere. Your reverence should consider everything carefully. It makes more sense to spend a few years on the work so that it will last rather than to do something that becomes a laughingstock. And that would matter little if virtue were not discredited.
9. It is also necessary to consider, if we now accept this means, to whom we should be bound for it doesn't seem there is anything certain for the present, and Father Visitator will ask what need there is of drawing up a contract. I would have been free of considering all these things if Father Visitator had done so. Now I have to make myself into the expert I'm not.
10. I beg you to give my regards to Señor Asensio Galiano, and give him this to read. He's always doing me favors in everything, for I am most happy that my letters are now safe. This wretched health of mine makes me slip into many faults. Ana de San Pedro prizes her daughters too highly to send them there; it doesn't even enter her mind. The day after tomorrow I will leave, provided some other sickness does not strike me down, and it would have to be a serious one to keep me back. All the letters have been delivered to San Gil; no response has yet come. Tomorrow, Tuesday, I'll try to get one.
Your honor's unworthy servant and daughter,
Teresa of Jesus
Ask my Father Rector to remember me in his prayers.
