Prologue
 
JHS
 
1. The Sisters in this monastery of St. Joseph have known that I received permission from the Father Presentado, Friar Domingo Báñez, of the order of the glorious St. Dominic, who at present is my confessor, to write some things about prayer. It seems I might be able to meet with success in doing this because I have discussed prayer with many spiritual and holy persons. The Sisters have urged me so persistently to tell them something about it that I have decided to obey them. I am aware that the great love they have for me will make what I say, so imperfectly and with such poor style, more acceptable than what is in some books that are very well written by those who know what they are writing about. And I trust in the Sisters' prayers that possibly through them the Lord will be pleased that I manage to say something about the mode and manner of life proper to this house. And if I should be mistaken, the Father Presentado, who will be the first to see this book, will either make corrections or burn it. I will not have lost anything by obeying these servants of God, and they will see what I have when left to myself and when His Majesty doesn't help me.
2. I am thinking of listing some remedies for certain common, small temptations of the devil, for since they are so common perhaps little attention is paid to them. And I shall write of other things as the Lord inspires me or that might come to my mind; for since I don't know what I'm going to say, I cannot say it in an orderly way. I believe this lack of order is best since writing this book is a thing already so out of order for me. May the Lord have a hand in all that I do so that it may conform to His holy will; these are my desires always, even though my works are as faulty as I am.
3. I know there is no lack of love in me and of the desire to help as much as I can that the souls of my Sisters may advance in the service of the Lord. This love together with my age and the experience I have from living in some monasteries may help me in speaking of ordinary things to be more successful than learned men. Since these learned men have other more important occupations and are strong, they don't pay so much attention to things that don't seem to amount to much in themselves. But everything can be harmful to those as weak as we women are. The wiles of the devil are many for women who live a very cloistered life, for the devil sees that new weapons are needed in order to do harm. I, as wretched as I am, have known how to defend myself only poorly. So I have desired that my Sisters might take warning from my own experience. I shall say nothing about what I have not experienced myself or seen in others [or received understanding of from our Lord in prayer.]
4. Not long ago I was ordered to write a certain account of my life, in which I also dealt with some things about prayer. It could be that my confessor would not want you to see this account, and so I shall put down here something of what was said there. I shall also write of other things that to me seem necessary. May the Lord's own hand be in this work, as I have begged Him; and may He direct the work to His glory, amen.
