CHAPTER 13
 
Continues to discuss mortification and how one must flee from the world's maxims and rules about honor in order to arrive at true wisdom.
 
1. I have often told you, Sisters, and now I want to leave it in writing here so that you will not forget it, that in this house -- and even in the case of any person seeking perfection -- you should run a thousand miles from such expressions as: "I was right." "They had no reason for doing this to me." "The one who did this to me was wrong." God deliver us from this poor way of reasoning. Does it seem to have been right that our good Jesus suffered so many insults and was made to undergo so much injustice? I don't know why the nun who doesn't want to carry the cross, except the one that seems to her reasonable, is in the monastery. Let her return to the world, although even there they will not respect such reasonings. Could you by chance suffer as much as you deserve? What kind of reasoning is this? I certainly don't understand it.
2. Let us reason in such a way when some honor is paid to us, or when we are given some comfort or receive good treatment; for certainly it isn't right that we be so treated in this life. When wrongs are done -- that's what they call them without there being any wrong done to us -- I don't know what there is to talk about. Either we are brides of so great a King or we are not. If we are, what honorable woman is there who does not share in the dishonors done to her spouse even though she does not will them? In fact, both spouses share the honor and the dishonor. Now, then, to enjoy a part in His kingdom and want no part in His dishonors and trials is nonsense.
3. May God not allow us to refuse the latter; but the nun to whom it seems she is herself least of all should consider herself the most blessed of all. And she indeed is. If she bears dishonor as it must be borne, she will not be without honor either in this life or in the next. Believe me in this. But what nonsense I have spoken -- that you believe me, when it has been said by true Wisdom, [who is Truth itself, and by the Queen of the angels. Let us, at least, imitate His humility in some way. I say "in some way," for however much we might lower and humble ourselves, someone like myself does nothing; for because of her sins she has merited that the devils humiliate and despise her, even though she wouldn't like their doing so. For even if you may not have so many sins, seldom is there anyone who hasn't done something by which he has merited hell.]
Let us, my daughters, imitate in some way the great humility of the Blessed Virgin, whose habit we wear, for it is embarrassing to call ourselves her nuns. However much it seems to us that we humble ourselves, we fall far short of being the daughters of such a Mother and the brides of such a Spouse.
Thus, if you do not diligently put a stop to the things mentioned, what today seems to be nothing will tomorrow perhaps be a venial sin; and it is so dangerous that if you are careless about it you will suffer its ill effects, for it is something very bad for religious communities.
4. We who live in community should be very careful about it so as not to harm those who work to do good for us and give us good example. And if we could understand what great harm is done when a bad custom is begun, we would rather die than be the cause of it. For such a death would be a bodily one, but the loss of souls is a great loss, and it doesn't seem there is any end to the loss. Once some are dead, others follow after; and all, perhaps, are hurt more from a bad custom we have started than from many virtues. For the devil does not allow the bad custom to cease, but natural weakness causes the virtues to be lost.
5. Oh, what a great act of charity and what a great service to God a nun would perform if when she sees she cannot follow the customs of this house she would recognize the fact and leave! And she ought to do so if she doesn't want to go through a hell here on earth; and, please God, there won't be another in the next life, for there are many reasons to fear such perdition, and perhaps neither she nor the others will understand this as I do.
6. Believe me in this matter; and if you don't, time will be my witness. For the style of life we aim to follow is not just that of nuns but of hermits, and thus you detach yourselves from every creature. I see the Lord gives this favor of detachment in a special way to the one He has chosen for this life. Even though the detachment may not be entirely perfect from the beginning, it is seen that she is advancing toward it by the great contentment and happiness she finds in not having to deal again with anything of the world and by how she relishes everything about the religious life.
I repeat that if she is inclined to the things of the world and not seen to be making progress that she should leave. If she still desires to be a nun, let her go to another monastery; and if she doesn't she will see what will happen to her. Don't let her complain about me, who started this way of life, for not having warned her.
7. This house is a heaven, if one can be had on this earth. Here we have a very happy life if one is pleased only with pleasing God and pays no attention to her own satisfaction. If a nun desires something in addition to pleasing God, all will be lost because that something cannot be had. The discontented nun is like someone who feels great loathing for food; however good the food may be, it nauseates him, and the food that healthy people find great pleasure in eating is repugnant to such person. This nun will be saved better elsewhere, and it may be that little by little she will reach the perfection that here she couldn't endure because she had to undertake it all at once. For although interiorly it takes time to become totally detached and mortified, exteriorly it must be done immediately. I fear that any nun who walks in such good company and sees that all the other nuns are detached but does not herself make progress in a year will not make more progress in many years, but less. I don't say that the detachment need be as complete as it is with the other nuns, but that you recognize that health is returning; for when the sickness is mortal, the fact becomes immediately obvious.

CHAPTER 14
 
The importance of not allowing anyone to make profession whose spirit goes contrary to the things mentioned.
 
1. I truly believe that the Lord highly favors the one who has real determination. Thus, the intention of the new member should be considered, lest she merely be looking for a secure future, as will be the case with many, although the Lord can bring this intention to perfection if she has good intelligence; but if she doesn't, in no way should she be accepted, for neither will she understand why she is entering, nor afterward will she understand those who desire to lead her along the best spiritual path. For the most part those who have this fault always think they know more about what suits them than do those who are wiser. And the fault is an evil I consider incurable, for it would be a wonder if those having this fault ever gave up their malice. Where there are many nuns this fault could be tolerated, but where there are so few it shouldn't be allowed.
2. When a nun with good intelligence begins to grow attached to good, she takes hold of it with fortitude because she sees that doing so is most appropriate. And if her intelligence doesn't help her to attain a high degree of spirituality, it will be useful for giving good counsel and for many other services without being a bother to anyone. If this good intelligence is lacking, I don't know how she can be of any use to the community, and she could be the cause of much harm.
This lack of intelligence is not so quickly noticed. For many speak well but understand poorly; others speak little and without polish but they have the intelligence for a great deal of good. In fact, there is a holy simplicity that knows little about the affairs and style of the world but a lot about dealing with God. Hence much information is necessary before accepting new members and a long probation before admitting them to profession. Let the world understand once and for all that you have the freedom to dismiss the new members and that in a monastery where austerities are practiced, there are many occasions for doing so. And when decisions of this sort become the custom, no one will take the dismissal as an affront.
3. I say this because we are living in such miserable times and our nature is so weak that we don't want to offend relatives, and so it is not enough that we have a command from our forefathers to stop paying attention to what people nowadays take for honor. May it please God that we do not pay in the next life for the new members we admit in this life; there is never a pretext for convincing ourselves that we can't do otherwise. [And in a matter so important no pretext is good, for when the bishop without attachment or passion looks after the good of the house, I don't think God will ever let him be mistaken. And I do believe that there will always be some mistake made if he is affected by such pity and foolish ideas about one's honor.]
4. And this is a matter that each one should consider, recommend to God, and encourage the prioress about, for it's something so important. Thus, I beg God to give you light. You are very fortunate that you do not receive dowries, for it can happen that in monasteries where they are accepted the nuns, so as to avoid giving back the money -- which they no longer have -- leave the thief in the house who steals the treasure from them; which is a great pity. In this matter you shouldn't take pity on anyone; for you would be doing harm to the person you are trying to help.

CHAPTER 15
 
The great good that lies in not excusing oneself even when blamed without fault.
 
1. [But what disorder in the way I write! Really, it's as though the work were done by one who doesn't know what she's doing. The fault is yours, Sisters, because you are the ones who ordered me to write this. Read it as best you can, for I am writing it as best I can. And if you find that it is all wrong, burn it. Time is necessary to do the work well, and I have so little as you see, for eight days must have gone by in which I haven't written anything. So I forget what I have said and also what I was going to say. Now it is wrong for me to ask you to avoid doing what I have just finished doing, that is, making excuses. For I see that not making excuses for oneself is a habit characteristic of high perfection, and very meritorious; it gives great edification. And although I have often taught it to you, and by God's goodness you practice it, His Majesty has never given it to me.]
I am very embarrassed about what I am going to try to persuade you of, for I should have practiced at least something of what I am about to tell you concerning this virtue. The fact is, I confess, that I have made very little progress. It always seems to me there is some reason for my thinking it is greater virtue to make an excuse for myself. Since at times it is lawful to give an excuse and it would be wrong not to do so, I don't have the discretion or, to put it better, humility to do so when fitting. Indeed, it calls for great humility to be silent at seeing oneself condemned without fault. This is a wonderful way to imitate the Lord who took away all our faults. So, I ask you to take great care about this practice; it brings with it great benefits. I see no reason at all for us to try to excuse ourselves, unless, as I say, in some cases where not telling the truth would cause anger or scandal. When to excuse oneself will be recognized by those who have more discretion than I.
2. I believe it's advantageous to get in the habit of practicing this virtue, or to strive to attain from the Lord the true humility that comes from it. The truly humble person must in fact desire to be held in little esteem, persecuted, and condemned without fault even in serious matters. If she desires to imitate the Lord, in what better way can she do so? For here there is no need of bodily strength or help from anyone but God.
3. I should like us, my Sisters, to strive very much for these great virtues; and let us do this penance, for you already know that I am rather strict when there is question of your doing too many penances. They can do harm to one's health if done without discretion. In this practice there is nothing to fear. However great the interior virtues may be, they do not take away the bodily strength necessary to keep the religious observance; on the contrary, they strengthen the soul. And from very little things, as I have said at other times, one can gain the light so as to come out the victor in great things. [But how easily one writes of this and how poorly I practice it!] Indeed, in these great things I have not been able to test this myself, for I have never heard anything evil said of me that I didn't see that it fell short; for even though I had not failed in the things they accused me of, I have offended God in many other areas, and it seemed to me they were being quite kind by not mentioning these other offenses. I am always happier that they speak about what is not true of me than the truth.
4. It is a great help to reflect upon the many things that are gained through all the various ways and how -- if we observe carefully -- we are never, never blamed without there being faults on our part, for we always go about full of them since the just man falls seven times a day, and it would be a lie to say we have no sin. Thus even though we are blamed for faults we haven't committed, we are never entirely without fault, as was the good Jesus.
5. O my Lord, when I think of the many ways You suffered and how You deserved none of these sufferings, I don't know what to say about myself, nor do I know where my common sense was when I didn't want to suffer, nor where I am when I excuse myself. You already know, my Good, that if I have some good it is a gift from no one else's hands but Yours. Now, Lord, what costs You more, to give much or little? If it is true that I have not merited this good, neither have I merited the favors You have granted me. Is it possible that I have wanted anyone to feel good about a thing as bad as I after so many evil things have been said about You who are the Good above all goods? Don't allow, don't allow, my God -- nor would I ever want You to allow -- that there be anything in Your servant that is displeasing in Your eyes. Observe, Lord, that mine are blind and satisfied with very little. Give me light and grant that I may truly desire to be abhorred by all since I have so often failed You who have loved me so faithfully.
6. What is this, my God? What do we expect to obtain from pleasing creatures? What does it matter if we are blamed a lot by all of them if in Your presence we are without fault? O my Sisters, we never completely understand this virtue; so, we are never completely perfect if we do not reflect and think a great deal upon what is and what is not. For when you have no other gain than the embarrassment of the person who after having blamed you sees that you are in fact without fault and yet allow yourself to be condemned, that gain is extremely great. At times something like this elevates a soul more than ten sermons. We must all try to be preachers through our deeds since the Apostle and our incapacity prevent us from being preachers through our words.
7. However enclosed you are, never think that the good or evil you do will remain a secret. And do you think, daughters, that when you do not excuse yourselves there will be lacking someone to defend you? Observe how the Lord answered for the Magdalene both in the house of the Pharisee and when her sister accused her. He will not be as harsh with you as He was with Himself, for at the time that one of the thieves defended Him, He was on the cross. So His Majesty will inspire someone to defend you; and when He doesn't, the defense won't be necessary. I have seen this, and it is true. But I wouldn't want you to be thinking about being defended, but that you rejoice in being blamed; and time will be the witness to the benefit you will see in your soul. For one begins to obtain freedom and doesn't care whether they say good or evil of him but rather thinks of what is said as though it were another's affair. The situation is like that in which we have two persons talking together but not to us; we then don't care about answering. So it is here; with the habit that has been acquired of not responding, it doesn't seem they are speaking to us.
This will seem impossible to those of us who are very sensitive and little mortified. In the beginning it is difficult; but I know that such freedom, self-denial, and detachment from ourselves can, with God's help, be attained.
