CHAPTER 16
 
The difference that must lie between the perfection of the life of contemplatives and that of those who are simply content with the practice of mental prayer. How it is possible that God may at times raise a distracted soul to perfect contemplation and the reason for His doing so. This chapter and the following one are very noteworthy.
 
1. [Don't think that what I have said so far is all I have to say, for I am just setting up the game, as they say. You asked me to mention something about the foundation for prayer. Even though God did not lead me by means of this foundation, for I still don't have these virtues, I know of no other. Now realize that anyone who doesn't know how to set up the pieces for a game of chess won't know how to play well. And if he doesn't know how to check his opponent's king, he won't know how to checkmate it either. Well, you will reprimand me because I am speaking about a game we do not have in this house, nor should we have it. Here you see the kind of Mother God has given you, that she even knows about this vanity; although they say that sometimes the game is permissible. And oh, how permissible this kind of game will be for us; and how quickly, if we play it often, will we checkmate this divine King, who will not be able to escape, nor will He want to.
2. The queen is the piece that can carry on the best battle in this game, and all the other pieces help. There's no queen like humility for making the King surrender. Humility drew the King from heaven to the womb of the Virgin, and with it, by one hair, we will draw Him to our souls. And realize that the one who has more humility will be the one who possesses Him more; and the one who has less will possess Him less. For I cannot understand how there could be humility without love or love without humility; nor are these two virtues possible without detachment from all creatures.
3. You will ask me, daughters, why I am speaking to you about virtues when you have enough books to teach you about them, and you will say that you want to hear only about contemplation. I say that had you asked about meditation I could have spoken about it and counseled all to practice it even though they do not possess the virtues, for meditation is the basis for acquiring all the virtues, and to undertake it is a matter of life and death for all Christians. And no one, however lost he may be, should set it aside if God has awakened him to so great a good, as I have already written elsewhere and as have many others who know what they are writing about; for I certainly don't know what I'm writing about -- God knows.
4. But contemplation is something else, daughters. This is the mistake we all make, that if a person spends a little time each day thinking about his sins -- for he is obliged to do that if he is a Christian more than in name -- they immediately say he is a very contemplative soul and they want him to possess at once virtues as great as those a very contemplative soul is obliged to have; and even the person himself wants this, but is mistaken. In the beginning he didn't know how to set up the game. He thought it was enough to know the pieces in order to checkmate the King. But that was impossible, for this King doesn't give Himself but to those who give themselves entirely to Him.]
5. Therefore, daughters, if you desire that I tell you about the way that leads to contemplation, you will have to bear with me if I enlarge a little on some other matters even though they may not seem to you so important; for in my opinion they are. And if you don't want to hear about them or to put them into practice, stay with your mental prayer for your whole life, for I assure you and all persons who aim after true contemplation (though I could be mistaken since I am judging by myself for whom it took twenty years) that you will not thereby reach it.
6. I now want to explain -- because some of you don't know -- what mental prayer is, and please God we shall practice this as it ought to be practiced. But I fear that mental prayer also involves much labor if the virtues are not obtained -- although it's not necessary that they be possessed in as high a degree as is required for contemplation. I say that the King of glory will not come to our soul -- I mean to be united with it -- if we do not make the effort to gain the great virtues. I want to explain this because if you should catch me saying something that isn't true you wouldn't believe anything, and you would be right if I did so knowingly; but God forbid! If I should say something that isn't true, it would be a matter of my not knowing more or not understanding. I want to say, then, that there are times when God will want to grant some great favor to persons who are in a bad state so as to draw them by this means out of the hands of the devil.
7. O my Lord, how often do we make You fight the devil in arm to arm combat! Isn't it enough that You allowed him to take You in his arms when he carried You to the pinnacle of the temple so that You might teach us how to conquer him? But what would it be like, daughters, to see him, with his darknesses, next to the Sun. And what fear that unfortunate one must have borne without knowing why, for God didn't allow him to understand it. Blessed be such compassion and mercy. What shame we Christians ought to have for making Him wrestle arm to arm, as I have said, with so foul a beast. It was truly necessary, Lord, that you have such strong arms. But how is it that they didn't weaken by the many torments You suffered on the cross? Oh, how everything that is suffered with love is healed again! And so I believe that had You survived, the very love You have for us would have healed Your wounds, for no other medicine was necessary. [It seems I am speaking nonsense, but I'm not; for divine love can do greater things than these. But to avoid seeming strange -- which I really am -- and so as not to give you bad example, I'll say no more.] O my God, grant that I might put medicine like this in everything that causes me pain and trial! How eagerly I would desire these if I could be sure that I'd be healed with so soothing a balm!
8. To return to what I was saying, there are souls that God thinks He can win to Himself by these means. Since He sees they are completely lost, His Majesty desires that nothing be wanting on His part. And even though they are in a bad state and lacking in virtue, He gives them spiritual delight, consolation, and tenderness that begin to stir the desires. And He even places them in contemplation sometimes, though He does so rarely and it lasts only a short while. He does this, as I say, so as to try them to see if with that favor they will want to prepare themselves to enjoy Him often. But if they don't prepare themselves -- pardon me; or better, may You pardon us, Lord, for it is a great evil when after You bring a soul like this to Yourself it approaches and becomes attached to some earthly thing.
9. For myself I hold that there are many to whom our Lord God gives this test, but few who prepare themselves for the enjoyment of the favor of contemplation. When the Lord grants it and we do not fail on our part, I hold as certain that He never ceases to give until we reach a very high degree. When we do not give ourselves to His Majesty with the determination with which He gives Himself to us, He does a good deal by leaving us in mental prayer and visiting us from time to time like servants in His vineyard.. But these others are favored children. He would not want them to leave His side, nor does He leave them, for they no longer want to leave Him. He seats them at His table, He shares with them His food even to the point of taking a portion from His own mouth to give them.
10. Oh, blessed care, my daughters! Oh, blessed renunciation of things so small and so base that reaches so high a state. What would it matter, when you are in the arms of God, if the whole world blamed you! He has the power to free you from everything, for once He commanded that the world be made, it was made; His will is the deed. Now do not fear that He will allow others to speak against you except for the benefit of one who loves Him. His love for those who love Him is not so small. Well why, my Sisters, shouldn’t we show our love for Him as much as we can? Behold it is a beautiful exchange to give our love for His. Consider that He can do all things, and we can’t do anything here below but what He enables us to do. Well, what is this that we do for You, Lord, our Maker? It amounts to almost nothing, just a little determination. Well, if from that which is nothing His Majesty desires us to merit everything, let’s not be foolish.
11. O Lord, how true that all harm comes to us from not keeping our eyes fixed on You; if we were to look at nothing else but the way, we would soon arrive. But we meet with a thousand falls and obstacles and lose the way because we don’t keep our eyes — as I say — on the true way. It seems so new to us that you would think we had never walked on it. It’s certainly something to excite pity, that which sometimes happens. [I say that it doesn’t seem we are Christians or that we ever in our lives read the Passion. God help me, if I neglect a little rule concerning someone’s honor! If anyone tells you not to worry about your honor, he at once seems to be unchristian. I laughed to myself — or rather was distressed — at what I sometimes saw in the world and even, because of my sins, in religious communities.] For any slight loss in one's honor is not tolerated, nor does it seem that such a loss should be tolerated. They immediately say: "We're not saints."
12. God deliver us, Sisters, when we do something imperfect, from saying: "We're not angels, we're not saints." Consider that even though we're not, it is a great good to think that if we try we can become saints with God's help. And have no fear that He will fail if we don't fail. Since we have not come here for any other thing, let us put our hands to the task, as they say. May we presume to use everything we learn about greater service of the Lord in His favor. The presumption I would like to see present in this house, for it always makes humility grow, is to have a holy daring; for God helps the strong and He shows no partiality.
13. I have digressed a good deal. I want to return to what I was saying, that is, explaining the nature of mental prayer and of contemplation. It may seem impertinent for me to be doing that, but for you everything is acceptable. It may be that you will understand the matter better through my rough style than through other more elegant styles. May the Lord help me, amen.

CHAPTER 17
 
Not all souls are suited for contemplation, and some reach it late. The truly humble person must be content with the path along which God leads him.
 
1. It seems I am already dealing with prayer. But something still remains to be said that is very important because it pertains to humility and is necessary in this house where the main occupation is prayer. And, as I said, it is only right that you should try to understand how to train yourselves a great deal in humility. In fact, this is an important aspect of prayer and indispensable for all persons who practice it. How could a truly humble person think he is as good as those who are contemplative? Yes, it is true, God can make you a contemplative -- through His goodness and mercy; but, in my opinion, one should always take the lowest place, for this is what the Lord told us to do and taught us in deed. Prepare yourself so that God may lead you along this path if He so desires. When He doesn't, you can practice humility, which is to consider yourself lucky to serve the servants of the Lord and praise His Majesty because He brought you among them and drew you away from the devils in hell where you deserved to be a slave of these devils.
2. I don't say this without serious cause, because, as I have said, it is important to understand that God doesn't lead all by one path, and perhaps the one who thinks she is walking along a very lowly path is in fact higher in the eyes of the Lord.
So, not because all in this house practice prayer must all be contemplatives; that's impossible. And it would be very distressing for the one who isn't a contemplative if she didn't understand the truth that to be a contemplative is a gift from God; and since being one isn't necessary for salvation, nor does God demand this, she shouldn't think anyone will demand it of her. So, you will not fail to be very perfect if you do what has been mentioned. Indeed, it could be that a Sister will gain much more merit because she must work harder and the Lord leads her as one who is strong, saving for her what she doesn't enjoy here below so as to give it to her all at once. Not for this reason should she grow fainthearted or give up prayer or what all the other Sisters are doing, for sometimes the Lord comes very late and pays just as well, and all at once, what He was giving to others in the course of many years.
3. I spent fourteen years never being able to practice meditation without reading. There will be many persons of this sort, and others who will be unable to meditate even with the reading but able only to pray vocally, and in this vocal prayer they will spend most of their time. There are minds so active they cannot dwell on one thing but are always restless, and to such an extreme that if they want to pause to think of God, a thousand absurdities, scruples, and doubts come to mind.
I know an elderly person who lives a good life, is penitential and an excellent servant of God, who has spent many hours for many years in vocal prayer, but in mental prayer she's helpless; the most she can do is go slowly in reciting the vocal prayers. There are a number of other persons of this kind. If humility is present, I don't believe they will be any the worse off in the end but will be very much the equals of those who receive many delights; and in a way they will be more secure, for we do not know if the delights are from God or from the devil. Now if the delights are not from God, there is greater danger because the work of the devil here is to instigate pride. But if they are from God, there is nothing to fear; they bring with them humility, as I have written very much at length in another book.
4. Those who do not receive these delights walk with humility, suspecting that this lack is their own fault, always concerned about making progress. They don't see anyone shed a tear without thinking that if they themselves don't shed any they are very far behind in the service of God. And perhaps they are much more advanced, for tears, even though they be good, are not all perfect. In humility, mortification, detachment, and the other virtues there is always greater security. There is nothing to fear; don't be afraid that you will fail to reach the perfection of those who are very contemplative.
5. St. Martha was a saint, even though they do not say she was contemplative. Well now, what more do you want than to be able to resemble this blessed woman who merited so often to have Christ our Lord in her home, give Him food, serve Him, and eat at table with Him [and even from His plate]? If she had been enraptured like the Magdalene, there wouldn't have been anyone to give food to the divine Guest. Well, think of this congregation as the home of St. Martha and that there must be people for every task. And those who are led by the active life shouldn't complain about those who are very much absorbed in contemplation, for these active ones know that the Lord will defend the contemplatives, even though these latter are silent since for the most part contemplation makes one forgetful of self and of all things.
6. Let them recall that it is necessary for someone to prepare His meal and let them consider themselves lucky to serve with Martha. Let them consider how true humility consists very much in great readiness to be content with whatever the Lord may want to do with them and in always finding oneself unworthy to be called His servant. If contemplating, practicing mental prayer and vocal prayer, taking care of the sick, helping with household chores, and working even at the lowliest tasks are all ways of serving the Guest who comes to be with us and eat and recreate, what difference does it make whether we serve in the one way or the other?
7. I don't say that we shouldn't try; on the contrary, we should try everything. What I am saying is that this is not a matter of your choosing but of the Lord's. If after many years He should give to each a certain task, it would be a nice kind of humility for you to want to choose for yourselves. Leave it up to the Lord of the house; He is wise, He is mighty, He understands what is suitable for you and what is suitable for Him as well. Be sure that if you do what lies in your power, preparing yourselves for contemplation with the perfection mentioned, and that if He doesn't give it to you (and I believe He will give it if detachment and humility are truly present), He will save this gift for you so as to grant it to you all at once in heaven. And, as I have said before, He wants to lead you as though you were strong, giving you the cross here below, something that His Majesty always had. What better friendship than that He desire for you what He desired for Himself? And it could be that you would not have received so great an award in contemplation. The judgments are His, there's no reason for us to become involved in them. It is good that the choice is not up to us, for then -- since contemplation seems a more restful path -- we would all be great contemplatives.
O wonderful gain, not to want to gain from following our own judgment lest we suffer any loss! God, in fact, never permits any loss to come to a person truly mortified save for a greater gain.

CHAPTER 18
 
Continues on the same subject and tells how the trials of contemplatives are much greater than those of persons living an active life. This chapter is very consoling for these latter.
 
1. Now, daughters, I tell those of you whom God does not lead by this path that from what I have seen and understood concerning the lives of those who do walk along it, contemplatives do not bear a lighter cross; and you would be surprised at the ways and modes in which God gives them crosses. I know both paths, and I know clearly that the trials God gives to contemplatives are intolerable. These trials are of such a kind that if He didn't give that food with its delights, these persons wouldn't be able to endure the trials. And it is clear that since God wants to lead those whom He greatly loves by the path of tribulation -- and the more He loves them the greater the tribulation -- there is no reason to think that He despises contemplatives, for with His own mouth He praises them and considers them His friends.
2. Well, to think that He admits into His intimate friendship people who live in comfort and without trials is foolish. I am very certain that God gives contemplatives much greater trials. Thus, since He leads them along a rough and uneven path and at times they think they are lost and must return to begin again, His Majesty needs to give them sustenance, and not water but wine so that in their inebriation they will not understand what they are suffering and will be able to endure it. So, I see few true contemplatives who are not courageous and determined to suffer, for the first thing the Lord does, if they are weak, is to give them courage and make them unafraid of trials.
3. I believe that when those of the active life see the contemplative favored a little, they think there is nothing else to the contemplative's life than receiving favors. Well, I say that perhaps these active persons couldn't endure one day of the kind the contemplative endures. Thus, since the Lord knows what each one is suited for, He gives to each person a proper task, one that He sees as appropriate for that person's soul, for the service of the Lord Himself and for the good of neighbor. And if you have done what you can to be prepared, do not fear that your effort will be lost. Keep in mind that I say we should all try to be contemplatives, since we are not here for any other reason. And we should try not for just a year, nor for only two, nor even for just ten; otherwise we leave the impression that we are giving up as cowards; and it is good for the Lord to know we are doing our best. We must be like soldiers who even though they may not have served a great deal must always be ready for any duty the captain commands them to undertake, since it is he who gives them their salary. And how much better the pay our King gives than the pay of earthly kings.
4. Since the captain sees his soldiers present and eager to serve and has understood the capability of each one, he distributes the duties according to the strengths he sees. And if these soldiers were not present, he wouldn't give them anything, nor would he command them to serve.
So it is with us, Sisters; let us give ourselves to mental prayer. And let whoever cannot practice it turn to vocal prayer, reading, and colloquy with God, as I shall say afterward. Do not abandon the hours of prayer we have in common; you don't know when the Spouse will call -- let not what happened to the foolish virgins happen to you. He may want to give more work, disguised in delight. If He doesn't, you should understand that this delight is not meant for you, that it is fitting for you to go without it. And here is where meriting through humility enters; one truly believes that he isn't even capable of doing the little he does.
5. You should be happy to serve in what they command you to do, as I have said. And if this humility is true, blessed be such a servant in the active life, for she will not complain but of herself. [I would much rather be like her than like some contemplatives.] Let the others fight their own war, which is not small. Even though the standard-bearer doesn't fight in the battle, he doesn't for that reason fail to walk in great danger; and interiorly he must do more work than anyone. Since he carries the flag, he cannot defend himself; and even though they cut him to pieces he must not let it out of his hands. So it is with contemplatives: they must keep the flag of humility raised and suffer all the blows they receive without returning any. Their duty is to suffer as Christ did, to hold high the cross, not to let it out of their hand whatever the dangers they see themselves in, nor let any weakness in suffering be seen in them; for this reason they are given so honorable an office. The contemplative must be careful about what he is doing, for if he lets go of the flag the battle will be lost. Thus, I believe that great harm is done to those who are not so advanced when they see that the deeds of those they consider to be captains already and friends of God are not in conformity with this office.
6. The other soldiers advance as best they can, and sometimes they retreat from where they see greater danger; and no one notices this, nor do these soldiers lose honor. As for the former ones, the eyes of all are upon them; they cannot stir. So their office is a good one, and the king does a great honor and favor to the one he gives it to, but the obligation in accepting it is not a small one.
So, Sisters, we don't know what we are asking for. Let us leave it to the Lord. [For He knows us better than we do ourselves. And true humility is content with what is received.] There are some persons who demand favors from God as though these were due them in justice. That's a nice kind of humility! Thus, He who knows all very seldom grants such persons favors, and rightly so. He sees clearly that they are not ready to drink from the chalice.
7. What each of you will understand, daughters, if you are advanced, will be that you are the most wretched of all. And this understanding will be manifested in deeds done for your own spiritual growth and for the good of others, and not in having more delights and raptures in prayer, or visions, or favors of this kind that the Lord grants; for we shall have to wait for the next world to see the value of such experiences. This understanding is like current coin, like unfailing revenue, like having a perpetual annuity and not a sum that's paid only once; for these other experiences come and go. This attitude includes the great virtues of humility and mortification, careful obedience by not in any way going against what the superior commands, for you truly know that God, in whose place the superior stands, commands it.
It is into this obedience that you must put the most effort; and, in my opinion, where there is no obedience there are no nuns. I am not saying anything about this virtue because I am speaking with nuns and, I think, good ones -- at least they desire to be good. In a matter of such wisdom and importance, no more than a word so that it won't be forgotten.
8. I say that I don't know why a nun under obedience by vow is in the monastery if she doesn't make every effort to practice this obedience with greater perfection. At least I can assure her that as long as she fails in obedience she will never attain to being a contemplative, nor will she even be a good active Sister; and I hold this as very, very certain. Even though a person may not have this obligation of the vow, if he desires or aims after contemplation, it is necessary for him in order to proceed correctly to give up his will, with complete determination, to a confessor, who must be the kind [that will understand him.] Since this practice is something already well known -- for there is more progress made in this way in one year then without it in many -- and it is not necessary for you, there's no need to talk of it.
9. I conclude by saying that these are the virtues I desire you to have, my daughters, the ones you must strive for and about which you should have holy envy. As for those other devotions, there's no need to be sorry about not having them; having them is an uncertain matter. It could be that in other persons they may be from God, whereas in your case His Majesty may permit them to be an illusion of the devil and that you be deceived by him, as were other persons [for in women this is something dangerous]. Why desire to serve the Lord in a doubtful way when you have so much that is safe? Who places you in these dangers?
10. I have enlarged so much on this subject because I know it is important; for this nature of ours is weak, and His Majesty will strengthen anyone to whom He wishes to give contemplation, I have paused to give these counsels to those to whom He doesn't give contemplation. By practicing them, the contemplatives, also, may humble themselves. [If, daughters, you say that you don't need them, perhaps someone else will come along who will be pleased to have them.]
May the Lord, because of who He is, give us light to follow His will in everything, and there will be nothing to fear.
