To my Most Reverend Señor and Padre Maestro Domingo Báñez, my lord.
1. Jesus. May the grace of the Holy Spirit be with your honor and with my soul. There is no reason to be amazed at anything that is done for love of God, for my love for Fray Domingo is such that whatever seems good to him seems so to me and what he wants, I want as well. I don't know where such enchantment will end.
2. Your Parda has made us happy. She is so outside herself with joy since her entrance that it makes us praise God. I don't think I will have the heart to take her as a lay sister, knowing how you have helped her. So, I have decided that they teach her how to read and on the basis of her progress we will make our decision.
3. My spirit has well understood hers even though I have not spoken to her. And there is a nun who cannot resist the deep prayer that this new sister stirs in her. Believe me, mi padre, it is a pleasure for me every time I accept someone who brings in nothing and is received for love of God alone; otherwise those who don't have anything would have to renounce their vocation for lack of means. I see that God does me a special favor allowing me to be a means to their salvation. If I could accept all in this way, I would be overjoyed. But I don't recall ever having refused anyone pleasing to me because she didn't have a dowry.
4. It made me particularly happy to see how God grants you such great favors as to use you in works like this of sending us a postulant. You have become the father of those of little means, and the charity the Lord gives you for this work makes me so happy that I will do anything I can to help you in deeds of this kind. But the flood of tears of the one who accompanied her! I thought it would never end. I don't know why you sent her here to me.
5. Father Visitator has given the permission, and it is the beginning of more to come with the help of God. And perhaps I will be able to accept the whimpering one, if it should please you. But I have too many for Segovia.
6. Parda found a good father when she found you. She says that she still doesn't believe she is living in our house. Her happiness is something to praise God for. I praised him also on seeing your little nephew who came with Doña Beatriz, and I rejoiced in meeting him. Why didn't you tell me beforehand?
7. It also pleases me that our new sister lived with my saintly friend. My friend's sister writes to me making generous offers of help. I tell you I have been deeply touched. It seems I love my friend much more than I did when she was alive.
8. You will have already heard that you received a vote for prior at San Esteban; the present prior received all the rest. I was edified to see such unanimity. Yesterday I was with a padre named Fray Melchor Cano, who is from your order. I tell you that if there were many spirits in your order like his, they could found some contemplative monasteries.
9. I wrote to Avila that those wanting to make such a foundation should not lose heart if they don't find the means here, for I have a great desire that there be a beginning. Why don't you tell me what you have done? May God make you as holy as I desire. I want to speak to you some day about those fears you have; they only make you waste time, and for want of humility you don't believe me. Fray Melchor does better, for after I spoke with him in Avila, he says, it benefited him and he doesn't believe an hour passes that he doesn't think of me. Oh, what a spirit, and what a soul God has in him! I was highly consoled by him. It seems I have nothing more to do than tell you about the spirit of others. Remain with God and beg him to give me a spirit that will never stray in any matter concerning his will.
It is Sunday night.
Your honor's daughter and servant,
Teresa of Jesus
