CHAPTER 16
 
Treats of some of the things that have taken place to the honor and glory of God, in this monastery of St. Joseph's in Toledo.
 
1. It has occurred to me to say something about what some of the nuns put into practice in the service of the Lord so that those who follow may strive to imitate the good things that were done in the beginning.
Before the house was bought, a nun named Ana de la Madre de Dios entered here at the age of forty. Her whole life had been spent in serving His Majesty. Although her house and way of life lacked no comfort because she lived alone and was well-to-do, she wanted instead to choose the poverty and submission of our order, and so she came to speak with me. Her health was poor. But since I saw she was so good and determined a soul, I thought she would be helpful for the beginning of the foundation; so I admitted her. God was pleased to give her much more health in the practice of austerity and submission than she had in her freedom and comfort.
2. What edified me, and the reason I am recording this here, is that before she made her profession she offered everything she owned -- and she was very rich -- as an alms to the house. I was not happy about this and did not want to consent, telling her that perhaps afterward either she would be sorry she entered or we might not want to admit her to profession. And I added that what she did was imprudent, although we would not have let her go without giving the money back. But I wanted to overstate the point: first, so that there would be no occasion for temptation; second, in order to test her spirit. She answered that if this were to happen she would beg for the money out of love of God. And I was unable to make her change her mind. She lived very happily and with much better health.
3. The mortification and the obedience that were practiced in this monastery were great. As a result, the several times that I was there the prioress had to be careful about what she said. For even when she said something only casually, they would immediately carry it out. Once they were looking at a pond that was in the garden, and she said to a nun standing nearby: "But what would happen if I were to say, 'jump in'?" Hardly was this said, and the nun was in the pond and got so soaked that she had to change her clothes. At another time, when I was present, the nuns were going to confession, and one who was waiting for the other to finish came to speak to the prioress. She asked her why she was doing that and if it was good way to recollect herself and told her to go stick her head in a well that was nearby and there think of her sins. The nun thought she was to jump into the well and went so quickly to do so that if they hadn't hurried to hold her back she would have done so thinking she was doing God the greatest service in the world. Other similar things, requiring much mortification, were done. This made it necessary for learned men to restrain the nuns and explain to them the matters in which they were obliged to obey. For these nuns did some things that were imprudent, so that if their good intention had not redeemed them, they would have lost rather than gained merit. The above is true not only of this monastery, but it occurred to me to speak of the matter here. Rather, in all the others there are so many things happening that I wish I had not a part in them so that I could freely tell about some of them for the praise of our Lord in His servants.
4. It happened that while I was here a fatal illness struck one of the Sisters. After receiving the sacraments and being anointed, her happiness and joy were so great that, as though she were going to another country, we were able to talk to her about how she should recommend us to God when in heaven and to the saints to whom we were devoted. A little before she died, I went to her room to be with her, for I had just gone before the Blessed Sacrament to beg the Lord to give her a good death. And when I entered I saw His Majesty at the head of the bed. His arms were partly opened as though He was protecting her, and He told me that I could be certain He would protect all the nuns that die in these monasteries and that they should not fear temptation at the hour of death. I was left very consoled and recollected. After a little while I began to speak to her, and she said to me: "O Mother, what great things I am going to see." Thus she died, like an angel.
5. And I have noticed that some who have died since this occurred have done so with quiet and calm as though they were in rapture or in the prayer of quiet, without showing the least sign of any temptation. Thus I hope in the goodness of God that He will be merciful to us at the moment of death through the merits of His Son and those of His glorious Mother whose habit we wear. Therefore, my daughters, let us strive to be true Carmelites, for soon the day's journey will end. And if we were to know the affliction that many experience at the hour of death and the cunning deceit with which the devil tempts them, we would highly esteem this favor.
6. One thing occurs to me now that I want to tell you, for I knew the person, and indeed he was almost a relative of my relatives. He was a great gambler, who had taken some theology by which the devil tried to deceive him, making him believe that the purpose of amendment at the hour of death was worth nothing. He had this so fixed in his mind that others could in no way get him to confess. Nor did anything suffice, though the poor man was extremely afflicted and repentant of the evil life he had lived. But he asked why he should confess since he saw that he was condemned. A learned Dominican friar who was his confessor did nothing but argue with him, but the devil taught him so many subtleties that the friar's arguments were insufficient. Thus for some days the confessor didn't know what to do; and, along with others, he must have recommended the matter urgently to the Lord since he had compassion on the man.
7. When the illness, which involved pain in the side, was beginning to afflict the man greatly, the confessor returned. He must have thought up other arguments, but they would have been of little benefit if the Lord had not taken pity on that man and softened his heart. And when the confessor began to speak to him and give him reasons, the man sat up in bed as though he were not sick at all and said to him: "What, in short, do you have to say that could help me benefit from my confession? For I want to make it." And he sent for a secretary or notary (I don't remember which) to record his testimony, and made a very solemn oath not to gamble any more and to amend his life. He confessed very well and received the sacraments with such devotion that from what we can understand according to our faith he was saved. May Our Lord be pleased, Sisters, that we live our lives as true daughters of the Blessed Virgin and keep our vows so that He may grant us the favor He has promised us. Amen.

CHAPTER 17
 
Treats of the foundation of the two monasteries in Pastrana, one for the nuns and one for the friars. They were made in 1570, I mean 1569.
 
1. After the foundation of the house in Toledo, during the fifteen days preceding Pentecost, the little church, the grates, and other things had to be prepared. There was a great deal to do, for as I have said we remained in this house for almost a year. I was tired after those days from going about with the workmen. When the vigil of Pentecost came, all the work was done. That morning as we sat in the refectory to eat, great consolation came over me in seeing that I no longer had anything to do and that I could enjoy some time with the Lord on Pentecost; I was almost unable to eat so consoled did my soul feel.
2. I did not deserve to have this consolation very long, for while I was in the midst of it, they came to tell me that a servant sent by the Princess of Eboli, the wife of Ruy Gómez de Silva, was there. I went to meet him and learned that the princess was sending him for me since I had been in communication with her for some time about the foundation of a monastery in Pastrana. I didn't think it was to come about so quickly. The idea made me uneasy because it would have been dangerous to leave a monastery founded so recently and in the midst of opposition. So I resolved not to go, and said so. The servant told me that this would not be acceptable, because the princess was already in Pastrana and had not gone for any other reason, that she would take a refusal as an insult. Despite all this, I had no thought of going, and so I told him to go get something to eat and that I would write to the princess; and then he left. He was a very honorable man, and though he did not like it that I refused, once I explained the reasons to him, he went along with them.
3. Moreover, the nuns who were to make up the new community had just arrived, another reason why I did not see how I could leave so soon. I went before the Blessed Sacrament to beg the Lord to help me write in such a way that the princess would not grow angry. That would have been very bad for us since the friars were then just beginning and, above all, it was good to keep in the favor of Ruy Gómez who had such strong influence with the king and with everyone. But I don't remember if I recalled the latter, although I know well that I did not want to displease Ruy Gómez. While I was praying to the Lord, He told me not to fail to go, that I was going for more than that foundation and that I should bring the rule and constitutions.
4. Since I heard this -- although for myself I saw serious reasons for not going -- I didn't dare but do what I usually do in similar instances, which was to follow the counsel of my confessor. And so I sent for him. I did not tell him what I had heard in prayer. In this way I am always left more satisfied, for I beg the Lord to give my confessors light in conformity with what they can know naturally. And when His Majesty wants something to be done, He puts it in their heart. This has happened to me many times. So it happened this time, for after considering everything, he thought I should go, and with that I decided to leave.
5. I sent out from Toledo the second day after Pentecost traveling by way of Madrid. There my companions and I went for lodging to a monastery of Franciscan nuns, with a lady, who had founded it and lived in it, named Doña Leonor Mascareñas. She had been the king's governess and is a very good servant of our Lord. I had lodged there at other times when on certain occasions I had to pass by, and she always showed me much kindness.
6. This lady told me she was happy I had come at that time because a hermit was there who eagerly desired to meet me and that it seemed to her the life he and his companions were living was very similar to that of our rule. The thought came to me that if this were so it would be a good thing since I had only two friars, and so I begged her to arrange for us to speak. He was staying in a room given him by this lady. He was there with another young brother named Fray Juan de la Miseria, a great servant of God and very simple with regard to the things of the world. While we were speaking together, this hermit told me that he wanted to go to Rome.
7. Before going on, I want to mention what I know about this Father, named Mariano de San Benito. He was Italian, a doctor, and very intelligent and talented. While he was living as the supervisor of the entire household of the queen of Poland, our Lord called him to leave all so as to better obtain his salvation. He had not been inclined to marry, but was a knight of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem. He had undergone some trials in which he had been falsely accused of being involved in a man's death and thus put in prison for two years. While there, he didn't want to be defended by any learned man or anyone else, but only by God and His justice, for there were witnesses who said that he had ordered them to kill the man. Resembling the old men in the story about Saint Susanna, when each was asked where the accused was at the time, one said that he was seated on a bed; and the other, at a window. In the end they confessed to having calumniated him. And he assured me that he had spent much money to free them so that they would not be punished, and that certain information had come into his possession against the one who had caused him the trouble and that he likewise did as much as he could not to do that one any harm.
8. Through these and other virtues -- for he is a clean-living and chaste man, unwilling to have any dealings with women -- he must have merited from our Lord knowledge of what the world is so that he would strive to withdraw from it. And thus he began to think about which religious order to join. And, from what he told me, in thinking about the different orders, he found in each one some difficulty for his temperament. He learned that near Seville some hermits had come together to live in a desert called El Tardon, under a very holy man, named Padre Mateo, whom they took as their superior. Each one lived apart in a cell. They did not recite the divine office together but did gather in an oratory for Mass. They had no fixed income; neither did they want to receive alms, nor did they. But they supported themselves by the work of their hands, and each one ate alone and very poorly. When I heard about this, it seemed to me to be a living picture of the life of our own holy fathers. Father Mariano had spent eight years in this manner of life. When the holy Council of Trent came and took away authorization for the eremitical life, he wanted to go to Rome to seek permission that they might continue as they were, and this was his intention when I spoke to him.
9. Well now, when he told me the manner of his life, I showed him our primitive rule and told him that without so much trouble he could observe all of that since his life was the same as that prescribed in the rule, especially living by the work of one's hands. He was very much inclined to the latter and told me that the world was lost because of greed and that this was why religious life was not valued. Since I felt the same, we quickly agreed in this and even in everything else. When I gave him reasons about how much he could serve God in this habit, he told me that he would think over the matter that night. I already saw that he was nearly decided, and I understood that what I had learned in prayer (that I was going to Pastrana for more than the foundation of a monastery of nuns) referred to this. The thought gave me the greatest happiness since it seemed to me that the Lord would be much served if this hermit were to enter the order. He was so moved that night by His Majesty, who desired this, that the next day he called for me, now very determined and even very surprised to see how quickly he himself had changed, especially through the instrumentality of a woman, for even now he sometimes mentions this to me, as though what I said were the cause and not the Lord who can change hearts.
10. Great are God's judgments. Mariano had gone many years without knowing what to decide concerning his state, for the life he had been living was not that of a religious, since the hermits did not make vows and take on any obligation other than to remain there in solitude. And God quickly moved him and revealed how much His Majesty would be served by him in this state and the need for him in order to carry on what had been begun. For he has helped a great deal, and up to now it has cost him many trials. And by what can be seen from the opposition the followers of this primitive rule now experience, the work will cost him more until it is firmly established. For through his talent, intelligence, and good life he is influential with many persons who favor and defend us.
11. Well then, he told me how Ruy Gómez had given him a good hermitage and site in Pastrana, the place where I was going, for a settlement of hermits and that he wanted to accept it for this order and receive the habit. I thanked him and praised our Lord greatly. For of the two monasteries for which our Most Reverend Father General had sent permission, only one had been founded. From there I sent a message to the two Fathers that were mentioned, the present provincial and the previous one, begging them to give me permission since the monastery could not be founded without their consent. And I wrote to the Bishop of Avila, Don Alvaro de Mendoza, who was very favorable toward us, to try to get them to grant it.
12. God was pleased that they look favorably on my request. It seemed to them that in a place so isolated the foundation could do them little harm. Mariano gave me his word that he would go there when the permission came. Thus, I was extremely happy. Once there, I met the princess and the prince, Ruy Gómez, who received me very cordially. They gave us a separate apartment, where we stayed longer than I had expected. For the house where we were to live was so small that the princess had ordered much of it to be torn down and many things built anew, but not the walls.
13. I spent three months there during which many trials were suffered, since the princess asked me to do things that were not fitting for our form of religious life, and so I decided, rather than make the foundation, to leave. The prince, Ruy Gómez, with both his common sense, which was very great, and his reasonableness, got his wife to agree with us. And I bore with some things because I was more desirous that the monastery of friars be founded than that of the nuns. I knew how important this was, and the importance afterward became clear.
14. At this time Mariano with his companion (the two hermits that were mentioned) came, and when the permission arrived, the prince and princess were glad to agree that the hermitage they had given him for hermits be used by discalced friars. I sent for Father Fray Antonio de Jesús, who was the first discalced and was in Mancera so that he might get the foundation started. I made habits and white mantles and did all I could so that they might take the habit at once.
15. At this time I had sent to Medina del Campo for more nuns, for I had brought only two with me. There was a Father in Medina, about middle-aged, not too old, not to young, and a very good preacher, whose name was Baltasar de Jesús. Since he knew that the monastery was being founded, he came with the nuns and desired to become a discalced. This he did after he arrived, and when he told me, I praised God. He gave the habit to Father Mariano and his companion. Both of them became lay brothers, for Father Mariano did not want to become a priest, but wanted to be the least of all; nor could I convince him otherwise. Afterward, by order of our Most Reverend Father General, he was ordained a priest. Once the two monasteries were established and Father Fray Antonio de Jesús had come, novices began to enter, of whom I shall give some examples later on. And they began to serve our Lord so authentically that, if He be pleased, someone more capable than I of telling about it, will put it in writing. For such a task, I would fall short.
16. As for the nuns, the monastery there received much kindness from the prince and princess. And the princess favored them and treated them well until the prince, Ruy Gómez, died. Tempted by the devil, or perhaps because the Lord permitted it -- His Majesty knows why -- the princess in the intense emotion felt from her husband's death entered to be a nun. With the affliction she was experiencing, the practices of enclosure to which she was not accustomed could only displease her, and because of the holy Council the prioress could not give the liberties the princess wanted.
17. The princess came to dislike both the prioress and all the rest of the nuns along with her. Such was her dislike that even after she discarded the habit and lived in her own house she caused them trouble. And the poor nuns were so disturbed that I strove in every way I could, begging the superiors to move the monastery from there and found one in Segovia. As will be said later, they did move to Segovia, and left behind all that the princess had given them, but brought along some nuns she had ordered them to accept without any dowry. The beds and other little things that the nuns had brought there with them they also took along. Their departures left the townspeople very sorry. As for me, seeing the nuns in peace left me with the greatest happiness in the world. For I was very well informed that they were in no way at fault for the displeasure of the princess. On the contrary, they served her as much when she had the habit as they did before she received it. The only occasion for her displeasure was the one I mentioned plus the hardship both she and the servant she had brought with her experienced. For, from what is known, she was entirely at fault. In sum, the Lord permitted it. He must have seen that it was not proper for that monastery to be there, for His judgments are great and beyond all our understanding. I, on my own account, would not dare do anything without consulting learned and holy persons.

CHAPTER 18
 
Treats of the foundation of the monastery of St. Joseph in Salamanca in the year 1570. Deals with some important counsels for prioresses.
 
1. After these two foundations were made, I returned to the city of Toledo, where I remained some months until the house, which I mentioned, was bought and everything was left in order. While I was engaged in these things, a rector of the Society of Jesus wrote me from Salamanca, telling me that it would be very good to have one of these monasteries there, giving me reasons for this. But since the town was very poor, I resisted founding a monastery there in poverty. In considering that Avila is just as poor, and the monastery there is never in want, nor do I believe that God will fail those who serve Him, if they live as moderately as we do, and that the nuns are so few and help themselves through the labor of their hands, I decided to make the foundation. And going from Toledo to Avila, I sought there to obtain permission from the bishop who was then ...  Since the Father Rector had informed him about our order and that the foundation would render service to God, he responded very favorably and gave the permission without delay.
2. It seemed to me that once I had permission from the ordinary, the monastery was a much as founded, so easy did the rest seem to me. Thus, I immediately sought to rent a house that a lady, whom I knew, would let me have. But this was a difficult thing to do because the time was not the proper one for renting and the student occupants agreed to leave only when the new occupants arrived. They did not know who the new ones would be, for I took the greatest care so that nothing would be known until I took possession of the foundation. I already have experience of what the devil stirs up to hinder one of these monasteries. And although with this one God, desiring it to be founded, did not allow him to cause trouble in the beginning, the trials and contradictions were so great afterward that they are still not completely overcome -- and some years have passed between the time it was founded and my writing this account. Thus, I believe that God is served very much in it since the devil cannot bear it.
3. Well now, having obtained the permission and being certain of a house to rent, I left for Salamanca. I trusted in the mercy of God because there wasn't a person there who could in any way help me with the great deal that had to be done in order to make the proper adaptations in the house. For the sake of secrecy, I took with me only one other nun as companion, for I found this to be better than bringing the nuns before taking possession. I had learned from experience through what had happened to me in Medina del Campo; there I got myself into much trouble. Thus, if there were some obstacle, I could undergo the trial alone, with no one other than the one required companion. We arrived on the vigil of All Saints. The previous night we had traveled a good deal before coming to a place to sleep. The weather was cold; and I, very sick.
4. I am not recording in these foundations the great hardships endured in the traveling: the cold, the heat, the snow (once it didn't stop snowing the whole day); sometimes getting lost, and at other times, being very sick and having a fever (for, glory to God, I usually have poor health). But I saw clearly that our Lord was giving me strength. It happened to me at times when a foundation was being planned that I would be so sick and have so many pains that I would get very anxious. It seemed to me that I wasn't even able to remain in my cell without lying down. I would turn to our Lord, complain to His Majesty, and ask how He desired me to do what I couldn't. Afterward, although I still felt the hardship, His Majesty gave me strength, and with the fervor and solicitude He gave, it seems I forgot about myself.
5. From what I now remember, fear of the hardship involved never prevented me from making a foundation even though I felt strong aversion to the traveling, especially the long journeys. But once we got started, the journey seemed easy to me, and I considered for whose service it was made and reflected that in that house the Lord would be praised and the Blessed Sacrament reserved. This is a special consolation for me: to see one more church, particularly when I recall the many that the Lutherans are suppressing. I don't know what trials, however great, should be feared if in exchange something so good comes about for Christianity. For although we often do not take note, it ought to be a great consolation for us that Jesus Christ, true God and true man, is present in the most Blessed Sacrament in many places. Certainly I am very often consoled in the choir when I see these very pure souls praising God, for one cannot help but recognize their holiness in many things, seeing their obedience, the joy so much enclosure and solitude give them, and their happiness when some opportunities for mortification come along. In places where the Lord gives the prioress more grace in exercising them in mortification, I see greater happiness. And the result is that the prioresses tire more easily in thus exercising them than these souls do in obeying, for never in this matter of mortification do the desires of these nuns cease.
6. Although this subject is foreign to the one concerning the foundation that I began discussing, some things are coming to my mind now about this matter of mortification. Perhaps, daughters, they will be important for the prioresses, and so lest I forget I'll mention them now. For since the prioresses have different talents and virtues, they seek to lead their nuns along their own way. The one who is very mortified thinks that anything she commands is easy to submit to, as it would be for her, but perhaps it would be very harmful for the nun to whom she gives the orders. We must be careful about this. If for ourselves something would be harsh, we must not order others to do it. Discretion is an important aspect of government, and very necessary in these houses. I would say much more necessary than in other houses, for the account one must render concerning one's subjects is greater. This applies in interior as well as exterior matters.
Other prioresses, who are very spiritual, would like to reduce everything to prayer; in sum, the Lord leads souls by different paths. But the prioresses must remember that they are not there for the purpose of choosing a path for others according to their own liking but so as to lead subjects by the path of the rule and constitutions even though they themselves might desire and feel urged to do something else.
7. Once I was living in one of these houses with a prioress who was fond of penance; she led all the others along this path. She once had the entire community take the discipline while reciting the seven penitential psalms with their accompanying prayers, and things of this sort. Thus it happens that if a prioress is absorbed in prayer, even though the hour is not one set apart for prayer, but after Matins, she keeps the whole community there even though it would be much better if the Sisters went to bed. If, as I say, she is fond of mortification, everyone has to follow suit, and these little sheep of the Virgin keep silent like little lambs; as for me, certainly, it causes much devotion, and embarrassment, and, at times, much temptation. The Sisters don't understand, for they are all absorbed in God. But I fear for their health and would want them to observe the rule, for with that there is plenty to do; and the rest should be done with gentleness. This is especially important in what pertains to mortification. For love of our Lord, the prioresses should be attentive in this, for discretion and knowledge of each one's talents are very important in these matters. If the prioresses are not carefully attentive, they will do the nuns much harm and leave them disturbed instead of helping them.
8. They must reflect that this mortification is not a matter of obligation; this is the first thing they must consider. Although mortification is very necessary in order that the soul gain freedom and high perfection, it is not accomplished in a short time. Rather, little by little, the prioress should help each one according to the spirituality and amount of intelligence God gives. It might seem to prioresses that intelligence is not necessary for this mortification, but they are mistaken. For with some nuns, much time will pass before they come to understand perfection and even the spirit of our rule (and perhaps they will afterward be the holiest), for they will not know when it is good to excuse oneself, and when not, or other trifling matters that if they understood they would perhaps carry out with ease. And such nuns do not completely understand, nor does it seem to them that these are matters pertaining to perfection, which is worse.
9. There is a nun in one of these houses who is among the best servants of God in them, insofar as I can tell. She has a deep spirituality, receives favors from His Majesty, and has a spirit of penance and humility; yet, she does not completely understand some points in the constitutions. The accusation of faults in chapter seems to her uncharitable, and she wonders how anyone can say anything against the Sisters and similar things and says that she could say some things against some Sisters who are very good servants of God; and in other matters I see that she is ahead of those who understand this well. The prioress must not then think that she understands a soul at once. Let her leave this to God, for it is He alone who can understand it. Rather, the prioress should strive to guide each nun along the way His Majesty is leading that one, provided that the nun is not failing in obedience or in the more essential matters of the rule and constitutions. That virgin martyr, from the eleven thousand, who hid herself did not fail to be a saint; on the contrary, by coming alone afterward to offer herself to be martyred, she perhaps suffered more than the rest of the virgins.
10. Now, then, let us return to the subject of mortification. The prioress may ask something of a nun in order to mortify her, and although it is a little thing it may be a heavy burden to the nun. And even though the Sister does it, she is left so disturbed and tempted that it would have been better had she not been told to do it; I mean, to do it right away. The prioress should take heed not to try to make such a one perfect by force but should allow her to proceed gradually until the Lord does the work in her. For that which is done to help her advance shouldn't be for her a cause of disturbance and spiritual distress, which is a very terrible thing, for she will be a very good nun without that perfection. Observing the others, she will gradually do as they do, as we have seen. And if she doesn't, she will be saved without this virtue of mortification. For I know one of these nuns who all her life practiced great virtue, and for some years now has served our Lord in may ways, and she often experiences some feelings and imperfections that she cannot do anything about, and she complained about them to me and is aware of them. I think that God allows her to fall into these sinless faults (for there is no sin in them) so that she might humble herself and realize that she is not totally perfect.
Therefore, some nuns will suffer great mortifications, and the greater the mortifications they are ordered to perform the more they will enjoy them because the Lord has given them the strength of soul to surrender their wills. Others will not suffer even little ones; and to impose mortifications on them would be comparable to loading a child down with two sacks of wheat. Not only will the child be unable to carry them, but he will bow under the weight and fall to the ground. Therefore, my daughters -- I am speaking with prioresses -- pardon me, for the things I have seen that happen to some make me to go on at greater length in this matter.
11. Another counsel I give you, and it is a very important one. Do not give any order that could be a sin (even venial) if carried out, and not even if you do so just to test obedience. (I've heard that some things would have involved mortal sin if done). At least the nuns, because of their innocence perhaps are without blame; but not the prioress, because there is no order she gives that they will not carry out immediately. And since they hear and read about what the saints of the desert did, everything seems to them well done if ordered by obedience, at least in their own case. And also let subjects be advised that anything that would be a mortal sin when not ordered by the superior would still be one if the superior orders it, unless the matter involves omitting Mass or the Church fast, or things like that, in which the prioress may have reasons for dispensing. But something like jumping into the well and things of that sort are wrong to do. No one should think that God must work miracles, as He did with the saints; there are many other things in which perfect obedience may be practiced.
12. All the mortification in which these dangers are not present, I praise. Once a Sister in Malagón asked permission to take a discipline, and the prioress (she must have been asked more than once) answered: "Don't bother me." Since the nun persisted, the prioress said: "Go on, keep walking; don't bother me." With great simplicity, the nun went walking for several hours until another Sister asked her why she was walking so much, or something like that. And she replied that she had been ordered to do so. When the bell was rung for Matins and the prioress asked where she was, the other nun told her what had taken place.
13. Thus it's necessary, as I have mentioned at another time, that the prioresses be careful about what they do with souls that they see are so obedient. For another Sister showed a nun one of those very large worms, telling her to observe how pretty it was. The prioress said to the nun jokingly, well, let Sister eat it. The Sister went and fried it very well. The cook asked her why she was frying it. She told her she was frying it so that she could eat it, and this she wanted to do. And the prioress, being very careless, could have done her much harm. I find I'm happier that they go to excess in matters of obedience because I am particularly devoted to this virtue, and so I have put down all I could so that the nuns might possess it. But it would profit me little to do so if the Lord through His supreme mercy had not given the grace for all in general to be inclined toward this virtue. May it please His Majesty to continue to give this grace long into the future. Amen.

CHAPTER 19
 
Continues the account of the foundation of the monastery of St. Joseph in the city of Salamanca.
 
1. I have digressed much. When something presents itself that by the Lord's will I come to understand through experience, it bothers me not give advice about it. It could be that what I think about the matter is worthwhile. Always inquire, daughters, from those who are learned, for through them you will learn how to advance along the way of perfection with discretion and in truth. If prioresses want to fulfill their duties well, they have great need to go to confession to a learned man (and if they don't, they will make many mistakes in the interests of sanctity); and they should strive also that their nuns confess to a learned man.
2. Well, on the vigil of All Saints, in the year that was mentioned, we arrived at noon in the city of Salamanca. From an inn I sought to find out through a good man there if the house was free. He was a great servant of God, named Nicolás Gutiérrez, to whom I had entrusted the task of making sure that it would be occupied. This man had won from His Majesty through is good life a great peace and happiness in the midst of trials, for he had undergone many trials. Having once enjoyed great prosperity, he was left very poor, but he bore the poverty with as much joy as he did the riches. The good man worked very hard for this foundation, with much dedication and willingness. When he came, he told me that the house was occupied, that he hadn't been able to get the students to leave. I told him how important it was that they vacate immediately, before my presence in that city became known, for I am always afraid lest some obstacles arise, as I have said. He went to the one who owned the house and insisted so much that it was vacated that afternoon. When it was almost night, we entered.
3. It was the first monastery I founded without reserving the Blessed Sacrament, for I had previously thought that a foundation was not official until the Blessed Sacrament was reserved. And I had now leaned that this wasn't necessary. That was a great consolation to me, for the house was in bad condition because of those students who had previously occupied it. Since they must not have had a gift for cleanliness, the whole house was in such a state that we did no small amount of work that night. The next morning the first Mass was said, and I arranged for more nuns to come from Medina del Campo. My companion and I spent the night of All Saints alone. I tell you, daughters, I have to laugh when I recall the fear of my companion, who was María del Sacramento, a nun older than I and a great servant of God.
4. The house was very large, was in a mess, and had many garrets. My companion couldn't get the students out of her mind, thinking that since they were so angry for having had to leave the house, one of them may have hidden there. They could have done this very easily, for there were many possibilities. We locked ourselves in a room where there was some straw, which was the first thing I provided for the founding of the house, because in having straw we would have a bed. We slept there that night with two borrowed blankets. The next day some nuns that were nearby, who we thought would be very displeased, lent us furnishings for our companions, who were to come, and sent us alms. Their monastery was called St. Isabel's and all the time we were there they gave us alms and did many favors for us.
5. Once my companion was locked in that room, it seems she calmed down a little with regard to the students, although she didn't do anything but look about from side to side, still fearful. And the devil must have helped by bringing to her mind thoughts about the danger. Her thoughts then began to disturb me, for with my weak heart, not much was needed. I asked her why she was looking around since no one could get in there. She answered: "Mother, I was wondering what would happen if I were to die now; what would you do here all alone?" If that had happened it would have been a hard thing for me to take. And I began to think a little about it and even become afraid. Because as for dead bodies, although I am not afraid of them, my heart gets weak even when I'm not alone. And since the tolling of the bells helped matters along, for, as I said, it was the vigil of All Souls, the devil had a good means of making us squander our thoughts on trifles. When he sees that one has no fear of him, he looks for other devices. I said to her: "Sister, when this happens, I'll think about what to do; now, let me sleep." Since we had just spent two bad nights, sleep came soon and took away our fears. The next day more nuns arrived, and with them present, the fears left.
6. The monastery was in this house for about three years -- I don't recall whether or not it was four, for I don't remember well since they sent me to the Incarnation in Avila. I never would, or did, leave any monastery until it was in fit condition, had a spirit of recollection, and was adapted according to my wishes. In this matter God greatly favored me, for when there was question of work to be done I enjoyed being the first. And as though I were to live in that house for the rest of my life, I sought to obtain everything, even the smallest thing that would contribute to the tranquility suitable for the life, and so it gave me great happiness to see that everything was in good shape. I very much regretted to see what these Sisters suffered, although not from a lack of sustenance (I took care of this from where I was, for the house was not located in a place suitable for receiving alms), but from a location that was unhealthy because of the humidity and cold. Since it was so large a house it could not be repaired. And, what was worse, the Blessed Sacrament was not reserved, which is a great affliction when so much enclosure is practiced. The Sisters were not unhappy but bore everything with a joy that moved one to praise God. Some told me that they thought it would be an imperfection to desire a house, that they were as happy there as they would be if they had the Blessed Sacrament.
7. Well, when the superior saw their perfection and the trial they were undergoing, he was moved with pity and ordered me to come from the Incarnation. They had already reached an agreement with a gentleman there who was going to sell them a house. But it was in such condition that they would have had to spend a thousand ducats before entering it. It belonged to an entailed estate, but the gentleman decided to allow us both to occupy it without first obtaining permission from the king and to put up partition walls. I got Father Julián de Avila, who is the one I said came with me on these foundations, and we looked at the house so as to decide what had to be done, for experience has taught me much about these things.
8. We went in August and hurried as much as we could. The nuns were able to stay where they were until the feast of St. Michael, the time when houses were rented there. But the house was still far from being finished. Since we had not rented for another year, the one in which we were staying had another renter already. We were in a great hurry. The whitewashing of the church was about finished. The gentleman who had sold us the house was not there. Some persons who wished us well told us that we had done wrong in coming so soon, but where there is need one takes poorly any advice that doesn't provide some help.
9. We moved on the eve of St. Michael, a little before dawn. The news had already been spread that the Blessed Sacrament would be reserved on the feast of St. Michael and that a sermon would be preached. Our Lord was pleased that on the afternoon of the day we moved it rained so hard that it was most difficult to bring the things we needed. The chapel had been newly fixed up, but the roof was so poorly tiled the rain came through most of it. I tell you, daughters, I felt very imperfect that day. Since the news had already been spread about, I didn't know what to do. I became so distressed that I said to the Lord, almost complaining, that either He not order me to get involved in repair works or He help me in this need. The good man Nicolás Gutiérrez, with his equanimity, as though nothing had happened, told me very meekly not to be disturbed, that God would provide a remedy. And so it happened. On the feast of St. Michael, when it was time for the people to come, the sun began to shine, which filled me with devotion, and I saw how much better that blessed man had done by trusting in our Lord than I with my disturbance.
10. There were many people, and there was music, and the Blessed Sacrament was reserved with great solemnity. Since this house is in a good location, the people began to know about it and be devoted to it. In particular, the Countess of Monterrey, Doña María Pimentel, favored us, as well as a lady, whose husband was the magistrate there, whose name was Doña Mariana. The very next day, as though to temper our happiness in having the Blessed Sacrament, the gentleman to whom the house belonged came. He was so furious that I didn't know what to do with him. And the devil made sure that he couldn't be reasoned with, for we had fulfilled all that we had agreed upon with him. There was little use in trying to explain to him. When some other persons spoke to him, he was a little appeased; but afterward he changed his mind again. I had already decided to leave the house. He didn't want this either, because he wanted to be given the money at once. His wife to whom the house belonged had desired to sell it in order to provide for two daughters, and this was the reason given in asking for the license to sell it. The money had already been deposited with a person chosen by the husband.
11. The fact is that even though this happened more than three years ago, the purchase of the house is not finalized, nor do I know whether the monastery will remain there; and this is why I have mentioned these things.
12. What I do know is that in none of the monasteries of the primitive rule that up to now the Lord has founded did the nuns come near to suffering trials as great as these. Through the mercy of God, those who are there are so good, for they bear everything happily. May it please His Majesty to lead them on, for whether or not they have a good house matters little. Rather, it gives us great pleasure to find we are in a house that we can be thrown out of, for we remember how the Lord of the world didn't have any. It has happened to us at times in these foundations that we were in a house that we didn't own, and the truth is that I never saw a nun distressed about that. May it please His Majesty that through His infinite goodness and mercy we will not be in want of the eternal dwelling places, amen, amen.
