THE CONSTITUTIONS
 
On the Order to Be Observed in Spiritual Matters
 
1. Matins are to be said after nine, not before, but not so long after nine that the nuns would be unable, when finished, to remain for a quarter of an hour examining their consciences as to how they have spent the day. The bell should be rung for this examen, and the one designated by the Mother Prioress should read a short passage from some book in the vernacular on the mystery that will serve as the subject for reflection the following day. The time spent in these exercises should be so arranged that at eleven o'clock the bell may be rung to signal the hour for retirement and sleep. The nuns should spend this time of examen and prayer together in the choir. Once the Office has begun, no Sister should leave the choir without permission.
2. In the summer they should arise at five and remain in prayer until six. In the winter they should rise at six and remain in prayer until seven. Immediately after prayer, they will say the Hours up to None, unless the day is a solemn feast or the feast of a saint to which the nuns have a special devotion. They will in that case postpone None so as to sing it before the Mass. On Sundays and feast days, Mass, Vespers, and Matins are to be sung. On the first days after Easter and on other solemn days they may sing Lauds, especially on the feast of the glorious St. Joseph.
3. The chant should never be sung with musical notation but should be done in a monotone and with uniform voices. Ordinarily, everything should be recited, and also the Mass, for the Lord will be served if some time remains so that the Sisters may earn their livelihood.
4. The Sisters should try not to miss choir for any light reason. When the Hours are finished, they should go about their duties. Mass will be said at eight o'clock in the summer and at nine in the winter. Those who receive Communion should remain a short while in choir.
 
The Days for Receiving the Lord
 
5. Communion will be received every Sunday, on feast days, and on days honoring our Lord, our Lady, our Father St. Albert, and St. Joseph, and on other days that the confessor designates in accordance with the devotion and spirit of the Sisters and with the permission of the Mother Prioress. Communion will also be received on the titular feast of the house.
6. Shortly before meals, the bell will be rung for the examen of conscience as to what has been done up to that time. Each one should propose to correct the greatest fault she sees in herself and recite an Our Father that God might give her the grace to do so. Each Sister should kneel down wherever she is and make her examen briefly. At two o'clock Vespers should be said, except during Lent when it will be said at eleven. During the times when Vespers is said at two, it should be followed by an hour of reading (during Lent the hour of reading takes place at two o'clock); this means that at two o'clock the bell is rung for Vespers. On the vigil of feast days, this hour of reading will take place after Compline.
7. In summer, Compline is to be said at six o'clock; in the winter, at five. In both winter and summer the bell is rung for silence at eight o'clock, and the silence is kept until after Prime of the following day. This silence should be observed with great care. During the other times, no Sister may speak with another without permission, except about necessary matters if she has duties to fulfill. The Mother Prioress may give permission should one Sister desire to speak with another so as to quicken the love each has for her Spouse or to be consoled in a time of some need or temptation. This rule of silence should not be understood to refer to a question and answer or to a few words, for such things can be spoken without permission. An hour before they say Matins, let the bell be rung for prayer. This hour of prayer may be spent in reading if they are drawn in spirit to spend the hour after Vespers in prayer. They may decide in accordance with what helps them most toward recollection.
8. The prioress should see to it that good books are available, especially The Life of Christ by the Carthusian, the Flos Sanctorum, The Imitation of Christ, The Oratory of Religious, and those books written by Fray Luis de Granada and by Father Fray Pedro de Alcántara. This sustenance for the soul is in some way as necessary as is food for the body. All of that time not taken up with community life and duties should be spent by each Sister in the cell or hermitage designated by the prioress; in sum, in a place where she can be recollected and, on those days that are not feast days, occupied in doing some work. By withdrawing into solitude in this way, we fulfill what the rule commands: that each one should be alone. No Sister, under pain of a grave fault, may enter the cell of another without the prioress's permission. Let there never be a common workroom.
 
On Temporal Matters
 
9. Let them live always on alms and without any income, but insofar as possible let there be no begging. Great must be the need that makes them resort to begging. Rather, they should help themselves with the work of their hands, as St. Paul did; the Lord will provide what they need. Provided they want no more than this and are content to live simply, they will have what is necessary to sustain life. If they strive with all their might to please the Lord, His Majesty will keep them from want. Their earnings must not come from work requiring careful attention to fine details but from spinning and sewing or other unrefined labor that does not so occupy the mind as to keep it from the Lord. Nor should they do work with gold or silver. Neither should there be any haggling over what is offered for their work. They should graciously accept what is given. If they see that the amount offered is insufficient, they should not take on the work.
10. In no way should the Sisters have any particular possessions, nor should such permission be granted; nothing in the line of food or clothing; nor should they have any coffer or small chest, or box, or cupboard, unless someone has an office in the community. But everything must be held in common. This is very important because through small things the devil can bring about a relaxation of the perfection in which poverty is observed. For this reason the prioress should be very careful. If she sees that a Sister is attached to something, be it a book, or a cell, or anything else, she should take it from her.
 
On Fasting
 
11. A fast is observed from the feast of the Exaltation of the Cross, which is in September, until Easter, with the exception of Sundays. Meat must never be eaten unless out of necessity as the rule prescribes.
12. The habit should be made of coarse cloth or black, rough wool, and only as much wool as is necessary should be used. The sleeves should be narrow, no wider at the opening than at the shoulder. Circular, without pleats, and no larger in the back than in the front, the habit should extend in length to the feet. The scapular should be made of the same material and four fingers shorter in length than the habit. The choir mantle should be white, of the same coarse cloth, and equal in length to the scapular. They should use as little cloth for this as possible, attending always to the necessary rather than to the superfluous. Let them always wear the scapular over the toque. The toques should be made of fine tow and without pleats; the inner tunics of fine wool, and the sheets of the same. Let sandals made from hemp be worn and, for the sake of modesty, stockings of rough wool or of cloth made from rough tow. The pillowcases may be of fine tow or, when necessary, of linen.
13. Straw-filled sacks will be used for mattresses, for it has been shown that these can be tolerated even by persons with weak health. No hangings should be used except, in cases of necessity, hemp mattings or, to cover a doorway, a blanket or some rough, woolen cloth or something similar that is poor. Each nun should have her own bed. Let there be no carpeting or cushions, except in the church. These are all matters of proper religious observance. They are mentioned here because with relaxation there comes sometimes a forgetfulness of what pertains to religious life and its obligations. Colored clothing or bedding must never be used, not even something as small as a ribbon. Sheepskins should never be worn. If someone is sick, she may wear an extra garment made of the same rough wool as the habit.
14. The Sisters must keep their hair cut so as not to have to waste time in combing it. Never should a mirror be used or any adornments; there should be complete self-forgetfulness.
 
On the Enclosure
 
15. No nun should be seen with her face unveiled unless she is with her father, mother, brothers, or sisters, or has some reason which would make it seem as appropriate as in the cases mentioned. And her dealings should be with persons who are an edification and help for the life of prayer and who provide spiritual consolation rather than recreation. Another nun should always be present unless one is dealing with conscience matters. The prioress must keep the key to both the parlor and the main entrance. When the doctor, barber surgeon, confessor, or other necessary persons enter the enclosure, they should always be accompanied by two nuns. When some sick nun goes to confession, another nun must always be standing there at a distance so that she sees the confessor. She shouldn't not speak to him, unless a word or two, but only the sick nun may do so.
16. In houses that have a choir, within the enclosure, where the Blessed Sacrament is reserved, and have chaplains or help for taking care of the church, there should be no door leading into the church. Where this help is not present, and the nuns cannot dispense from having a door, the prioress should keep the key. The door should be opened only when necessary and by two Sisters. When there is help for taking care of the church, the entrance should be closed up if there had been a door there.
17. The novices should be allowed visitors just as are the professed. For if they are in any way unhappy, this should make it clear that they are expected to remain only if they are very willing to do so. And they should be given the opportunity to say so if they do not want to remain.
18. The Sisters should pay no attention to the affairs of the world, nor should they speak about them. They may do so if the matter concerns something for which they can offer a remedy or help those with whom they are speaking, assist them in finding the truth, or console them in some trial. If no effort is being made to make the conversation a fruitful one, they should bring it to a quick conclusion, as was said. It is very important that those who visit us leave with some benefit, and not after having wasted time, and that we benefit too. The companion should watch carefully whether this rule is observed. She is obliged to inform the prioress if it is not. When she does not do this, she incurs the same penalty as the one who breaks the rule. The punishment is that after having been warned twice by her companion, a nun on the third occasion should be given nine days in the prison cell and, on the third day of the nine, a discipline in the refectory. For the above rule is very important to the religious life.
19. As much as they can, the Sisters should avoid a great deal of conversation with relatives. Aside from the fact that they will become preoccupied with their relatives' affairs, they will find it difficult to avoid talking to them about worldly things.
20. Let them be very careful in speaking with outsiders, even though these may be close relatives. If these persons are not the kind who find their satisfaction in speaking about the things of God, they should be seen seldom, and the visit kept short.
 
On Accepting Novices
 
21. Let the nuns consider carefully whether those about to be received are persons of prayer desiring full perfection and contempt for the world. These aspirants should be at least seventeen. And if they are not detached from the world, they will find the way we live here hard to bear. It is better to consider these things beforehand than to have to turn these persons away afterward. Aspirants should be healthy, intelligent, and able to recite the Divine Office and assist in choir. Profession should not be allowed if during the year of novitiate the novice does not show that she has the temperament and other qualities necessary for the kind of life she would have to live here. If some of these qualities are lacking, she should not be accepted, unless she is a person so taken with the service of the Lord and useful to the house that the deficiencies would give no cause whatsoever for disquiet and our Lord would be served by our consenting to her holy desires. If these latter are not great, for great desires will be the sign that God is calling her to this state, she should by no means be received. An applicant with whom the nuns are pleased should not be turned away because she has no alms to give the house; and this has always been the procedure. Should she desire to give an alms to the house, and holds it for that reason, she should not be refused profession if afterward she does not for some reason give it, nor should the nuns try to get the money through litigation. Let them be careful so as not to be motivated by self-interest. Little by little greed could so enter that they would look more to the alms than to the goodness and quality of the person. This should in no way be done, for doing so would be a great evil. They must ever keep in mind their profession of poverty that they might always in everything give off its fragrance. Let them reflect that it is not money that will sustain them but faith, perfection, and trust in God alone. This law should be considered carefully and be observed; it is appropriate and should be read to the Sisters. When someone is accepted, it should always be done in accordance with the majority opinion of the community, and the same holds for profession. Candidates being considered for admission as lay Sisters should be robust and be persons who show that they want to serve the Lord. They should spend a year before receiving the habit so that it may be seen whether they are fit for the demands of such a life, and so that they themselves may see whether they can bear up with it. They should not cover their faces with a veil, nor should they wear a black one. They may make profession two years after receiving the habit, unless through their great virtue they merit making profession sooner. They should be treated with complete sisterly charity, and food and clothing should be provided for them just as they are for all.
 
On the Humble Offices
 
22. The Mother Prioress should be the first on the list for sweeping so that she might give good example to all. She should pay careful attention to whether those in charge of the clothes and the food provide charitably for the Sisters in what is needed for subsistence and in everything else. Those having these offices should do no more for the prioress and the older nuns than they do for all the rest, as the rule prescribes, but be attentive to needs and age, and more so to needs, for sometimes those who are older have fewer needs. Since this is a general rule, it merits careful consideration, for it applies in many things. Let no Sister comment on whether the food given to eat is much or little, well or poorly seasoned. Let the prioress and the provider take care so that what is given (depending on what the Lord has given) is well prepared and the nuns will be able to get along with it, for they have nothing else. The Sisters should be obliged to tell the Mother Prioress of their needs, and the novices to tell the novice mistress; this with regard to both clothing and food. And if they need something more than the usual things, they should, even though this may not be great, commend the matter to our Lord first. Our human nature often asks for more than what it needs, and sometimes the devil helps so as to cause fear about the practice of penance and fasting.
 
On the Sick
 
23. The sick should be cared for with fullness of love, concern for their comfort, and compassion in accordance with the poverty we practice. And they should praise God, our Lord, when they are well provided for. If they lack the things the wealthy possess for bringing relief in their illnesses, let them not become sad. In joining us one must be very resolved about such matters. This is what it means to be poor: to be in want, perhaps, at times of greater need. The Mother Prioress should be very careful that the healthy nuns be deprived of something necessary rather than have the sick ones go without some deeds of kindness. The sick ought to be visited and comforted by the Sisters. Let an infirmarian be appointed who has the ability and charity for this office. The sick nuns should strive, then, to show the perfection they acquired when healthy, being patient and as little a bother as possible if the illness is not serious. They should be obedient to the infirmarian, for her benefit and for the edification of the Sisters, that they themselves might gain through their illness. They should have linens and good beds (I mean, with mattresses) and should be treated with much charity and cleanliness.
24. Work with a time limit should never be given to the Sisters. Each one should strive to work so that the others might have food to eat. They should take into careful account what the rule ordains (that whoever wants to eat must work) and what St. Paul did. If someone should volunteer to take on a fixed daily amount of work, she may do so but ought not be given a penance if she fails to finish it.
25. Each day after supper, or collation, when the Sisters are gathered together, the turnkeeper should announce what was given that day in alms, naming the donors so that all may take care to pray that God will repay them.
26. The time for dinner cannot be fixed since this depends on how the Lord gives. When possible, during the winter, on Church fast days, the bell for dinner should be rung at eleven-thirty and on fast days of the order, at eleven; during the summer, at ten. Should the Lord give a Sister the desire to perform a mortification, she should ask permission. This good, devotional practice should not be lost, for some benefits are drawn from it. Let it be done quickly so as not to interfere with the reading. Outside the time of dinner and supper, no Sister should eat or drink without permission. When they are through with the meal, the Mother Prioress may dispense from the silence so that all may converse together on whatever topic pleases them most as long as it is not one that is inappropriate for a good religious. And they should all have their distaffs with them there.
27. Games should in no way be permitted, for the Lord will give to one the grace to entertain the others. In this way, the time will be well spent. They should strive not to be offensive to one another, but their words and jests must be discreet. When this hour of being together is over, they may in summer sleep for an hour; and whoever might not wish to sleep should observe silence.
28. After Compline and prayer, as was mentioned above, in both winter and summer, the Mother may allow the Sisters to talk together, each one having her work, as was mentioned. The amount of time should be determined by the Mother Prioress. Let no Sister embrace another or touch her on the face or hands. The Sisters should not have particular friendships but should include all in their love for one another, as Christ often commanded His disciples. Since they are so few, this will be easy to do. They should strive to imitate their Spouse who gave His life for us. This love for one another that includes all and singles out no one in particular is very important.
29. No nun should reprove another for the faults she see her commit. If they are serious, she should admonish her privately in a charitable way. And if the nun after being told three times does not amend, the Mother Prioress should be told but no other Sister. Since there are Sisters appointed as monitors to attend to the faults, the rest of the Sisters need not bother and may pass over those seen in others and pay attention to their own. Nor should they meddle with faults committed in the fulfillment of offices, unless it's a serious matter which they are obliged to make known, as was mentioned. They should be very careful not to excuse themselves unless in matters where it is necessary to do so, for they will find much benefit in this practice.
30. The monitors should take great care to notice the faults and, when ordered by the prioress, should at times reprimand the Sisters in public, even though this may mean that a younger Sister is reprimanding an older one. One is thereby exercised in humility. Thus the Sisters should not answer back even if they are without fault. No Sister may give or receive or ask for anything, even from her parents, without permission from the prioress. Everything that is offered as alms, should be shown to the prioress. Never should the prioress or any of the Sisters use the title Doña.
31. The punishment for the faults and failings committed in matters that were mentioned should be those penalties designated at the end of these constitutions, according to the seriousness of the fault, since almost everything is set up in conformity with our rule. In all of the above, the Mother Prioress may with discretion and charity dispense in accordance with what may be just, and its observance does not oblige under pain of sin but of corporal punishment.
32. The house, with the exception of the church, should never be adorned, nor should there be anything finely wrought, but the wood should be rough. Let the house be small and the rooms humble: something that fulfills rather than exceeds the need. It should be as strong as possible. The wall should be high, and there should be a field where hermitages can be constructed so that the Sisters may be able to withdraw for prayers as our holy Fathers did.
 
On the Deceased
 
33. The sacraments should be administered as ordained in the ordinal. The funeral and burial of a deceased nun should include a vigil and sung Mass; and also on the first anniversary, an Office of the dead and a sung Mass. If it is possible the Gregorian Masses should be said for them; and if not, whatever is possible. The whole community should recite an Office of the dead for the nuns of their own monastery; and for other nuns (those of the primitive rule), an Office of the dead should be recited and, if possible, a Mass sung. For nuns of the mitigated observance, an Office of the dead should be recited.
 
On the Obligations of Each Office
 
34. It is the duty of the Mother Prioress to take great care in everything about the observance of the rule and constitutions, to look after the integrity and enclosure of the house, to observe how the offices are carried out, and to see that both spiritual and temporal needs are provided for; and these things should be done with a mother's love. She should strive to be loved so that she may be obeyed. The prioress should appoint as portress and sacristan persons whom she can trust. So as not to allow for any attachment to an office, she may remove them as she sees fit. She should appoint nuns to all the other offices as well with the exception of those of subprioress and key-bearer which are elected offices. At least two of the key-bearers should know how to write and keep accounts.
35. It is the duty of the Mother Subprioress to take care of the choir so that the recitation and chanting be done well, and the pause observed. This should be looked after carefully. When the prioress is absent, the subprioress should preside, be always present in the community, and correct the faults that are committed in the choir and refectory.
36. The key-bearers should receive a monthly report from the treasurer with the prioress present; the prioress should seek the opinion of the key-bearers in serious matters and have a chest, to which there should be three keys, for the community documents and funds. The prioress must have one key, and the oldest key-bearers the other two.
37. It is the duty of the sacristan to take care of all the things pertaining to the church and to see to it that the Lord is served there with much reverence and cleanliness. She should arrange that the hearing of confessions proceed in good order and, under pain of grave fault, she must not allow anyone to approach the confessional without permission unless to confess to an appointed confessor.
38. The duty of the treasurer and elder portress (offices that should be held by the same person) is to take care of providing in due time, if the Lord gives the means, for all that must be bought for the house. This Sister must speak at the turn with a subdued voice and in an edifying way. She must look after the needs of the Sisters with charity and keep accounts of income and expenses. When she buys something she should not engage in haggling and bargaining over the price, but after discussing the cost twice she should either take the item or leave it. She shouldn't allow any Sister to come to the turn without permission. If a Sister must go to the grate to speak with someone, another Sister should be called to accompany her. The portress should tell no one about what comes to pass at the turn except the prioress, nor should she give anyone a letter without first giving it to the prioress to read. Neither should she, under pain of grave fault, give a message to any Sister or pass one along to someone outside without first giving it to the prioress.
39. The monitors should take great care to notice faults, for this is an important office, and they should tell the prioress about them, as was mentioned.
40. The novice mistress should be very prudent, prayerful, and spiritual. She should take great care to read the constitutions to the novices and teach them all that they have to do with regard to ceremonies and mortification. She should stress the interior life more than exterior things, taking daily account of how the novices are progressing in prayer, how they get along with the mystery on which they must meditate, and of the benefit they are deriving from it. She should teach them how to proceed with this practice and how in times of dryness to break their own will even in small things. Let the one who has this office be careful lest she grow careless in anything, for it is a matter of educating souls so that the Lord might dwell in them. Let her treat them compassionately and lovingly, not being surprised by their faults, for they must advance little by little, and mortify each one according to what her spirit can suffer. She should lay more stress on doing away with the lack of virtue than on rigorous penance. The prioress should send someone to help her teach them to read.
41. All the Sisters should give the prioress a monthly account of how they have done in prayer, of how the Lord is leading them, for His Majesty will give her light so that if they are not proceeding well she might guide them. Doing this requires humility and mortification and is very beneficial. Should the prioress find that she has no one competent for the office of novice mistress, she should herself take on the office and regard this work as something most important and appoint someone to help her.
42. When those who have an office must spend the hour designated for prayer at their task, they should take another hour for prayer in which they are the most likely to be free. This should be understood to apply when they are not able to give themselves to prayer for the whole, or greater part, of the hour.
57. In each monastery a copy of these constitutions should be kept in the chest of three keys, and there should be other copies so that they may be read once a week to all the Sisters gathered in community at a time fixed by the Mother Prioress. Each Sister should keep them very much in mind, for this is what they must do in order, with the help of the Lord, to advance far. They should read them at times, and thus there should be more copies in the monastery than those mentioned so that each one if she desires, may take a copy to her cell.
58. Alms in the form of money that the Lord might give should always be placed at once in the chest of three keys save when it amounts to less than nine or ten ducats. In this latter case it should be given to the key-bearer designated by the prioress, and she in turn will give the procuratrix what the prioress has told the latter to spend. Each night before the bell is rung for silence, the procuratrix should give a detailed account to either the prioress or the key-bearer. And when the accounting is made, they should together record it in the monastery book so as to render a yearly account to the visitator.
 
Deo Gratias
 
59. The ordinal prescribes some of the disciplines that are to be taken when the ferial Office is recited; the discipline is taken on ferial days in Advent and Lent; outside these times, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays when the ferial Office is recited. In addition, it should be taken every Friday of the year for the increase of the faith, for benefactors, for souls in purgatory, for captives, and for those in mortal sin. A Miserere and prayers for the Church and for those intentions mentioned should be recited. Each one should take these disciplines herself in the choir after Matins. The others are given with twigs as the ordinal prescribes. No one should take any more disciplines without permission, nor do anything penitential without it.

On The Chapter of Grave Faults
 
43. The chapter of grave faults, in which according to the rule the faults of the Sisters must be corrected with charity, should take place once a week. It should always be held while the nuns are fasting. Thus when the signal is given and all have come together in the chapter room, the Sister who has the office of reader, when given a sign by the prioress or presider, should read from these constitutions and the rule. The reader should say: Jube Domne benedicere, and the presider respond: Regularibus disciplinis nos instruere digneris Magister Celestis. They will answer: amen. Then, if it should seem opportune to the Mother Prioress to mention some things briefly about the reading or the correction of the Sisters before beginning with the latter, she should say: Benedicite, and the Sisters should respond: Dominus, and prostrate until they are told to rise. When they have risen they should return to their seats. Beginning with the novices and lay Sisters, followed by the older nuns, the Sisters should come to the middle of the choir, two by two, and tell their manifest faults and negligences to the presider. First the lay Sisters and novices may be dismissed, as well as those who do not have a place or voice in the chapter. The Sisters should not speak in chapter except for two reasons: to tell simply their own faults and those of their Sisters and to respond to the questions of the presider. And anyone who is accused should be on her guard lest she accuse another solely out of suspicion. If anyone does this, she should receive the very punishment that goes with the crime about which she made the accusation. And the same goes for anyone making an accusation about a fault for which satisfaction has already been made. But so that vices and defects may not be hidden, a Sister may tell the Mother Prioress or visitator that which she saw or heard.
44. She should likewise be punished who says something falsely about another. And she should also be obliged to restore, in so far as possible, the good name of the one whose reputation was harmed. And the one who is accused should not respond unless ordered to do so, and then should do so humbly, saying: Benedicite. And if she answers impatiently, she should then receive a heavier penalty, according to the discretion of the presider. The punishment should be given after the anger has subsided.
45. Let the Sisters be on their guard against divulging or publicizing the decrees and secrets of any chapter. No Sister should repeat outside in a critical manner any of those things that the Mother may punish or define in chapter, for this gives rise to discord and takes away the peace of the community, and factions are formed, and the office of superiors is usurped.
46. The Mother Prioress, or presider, with zealous charity and a love of justice and without feigning ignorance, should correct the faults -- and may do so legitimately -- which are clearly found to exist, or which are confessed, in conformity with what has been stated here.
47. The Mother may mitigate or shorten the penalty due a fault that was not committed out of malice, at least for the first, second, or third time. But those who are found to be troublesome out of malicious cunning or from a vicious habit should have their fixed penalties augmented, and these should not be omitted or relaxed without permission from the visitator. And those who are in the habit of committing a light fault should be given a penance fit for a more serious fault. The same goes for the others; the fixed penalties should also be augmented if the fault is habitual.
48. Once the faults have been heard or corrected, they should say the psalms Miserere mei and Deus misereatur as the Ordinary prescribes. And when the chapter is finished the presider should say: Sit nomen Domini benedictum. The community should respond: Ex hoc nunc et usque in saecula.
 
On the Light Fault
 
49. It is a light fault:
  	If anyone, when the sign is given, should delay in preparing with due haste or promptness to go to the choir in a composed and orderly way and at the proper time.
  	If anyone should enter after the Office has begun, or read or sing badly, or make a mistake and not at once humble herself before all.
  	If anyone is not ready to do the reading at the established time.
  	If anyone through negligence does not have the book from which she must pray.
  	If anyone should laugh in choir or make others laugh.
  	If anyone should come late for the divine office or for work.
  	If anyone should make light of or not duly observe the rubrics on prostrations, bows, and other ceremonies.
  	If anyone should cause some disturbance or noise in the choir, or in the dormitory, or in the cells.
  	If anyone should come late for chapter, the refectory, or work.
  	If anyone should speak or act idly or become engaged in idle occupations.
  	If anyone without restraint make some noise.
  	If anyone should be negligent in the use of books, clothes, or other things belonging to the monastery, or should break them, or should lose some of the things that are used in taking care of the house.
  	If anyone should eat or drink without permission. Those who are accused or who accuse themselves of these and similar faults, should be given a penance: prayer or prayers according to the quality of the faults, or also some humble work, or some special time of silence (because of having broken the silence observed in the order), or abstinence from some food in some collation or meal.
 
On the Medium Fault
 
50. It is a medium fault:
  	If anyone arrives in choir after the first psalm has been said. And when they arrive late, they should prostrate until the Mother Prioress tells them to rise.
  	If anyone should presume to sing or read in a way different from that which is in use.
  	If anyone, while not being attentive with lowered eyes to the Divine Office, should show levity of mind.
  	If anyone should handle the altar vessels irreverently.
  	If anyone should not come to chapter or work or a sermon, or should fail to be present at the common meal.
  	If anyone should knowingly fail to observe a common precept.
  	If anyone should be found negligent in an assigned task.
  	If anyone should speak in chapter without permission.
  	If anyone while being accused should make noise.
  	If anyone should presume to accuse another, on the same day, of the very fault she was accused of and thereby get revenge.
  	If anyone should be disorderly in gesture or dress.
  	If anyone should swear or speak in a disorderly way, or what is more serious should do so habitually.
  	If anyone should quarrel with another or say something by which the Sisters may be offended.
  	If anyone when asked should deny pardon to the one who offended her.
  	If anyone should enter the house offices or work rooms without permission. Anyone accused of the above mentioned or similar faults should be corrected in chapter by a discipline. This should be administered by the prioress or by someone she appoints. The accuser of the fault should not be the one to administer the penance, nor should the younger nuns administer it to the older ones.
 
On the Grave Fault
 
51. It is a grave fault:
  	If anyone quarrels with another in an unbecoming manner.
  	If anyone should be found using abusive language, cursing, or uttering unruly and irreligious words in having become angry with another.
  	If anyone should swear or speak in an abusive way about the past fault of a Sister for which she has made satisfaction or about her natural defects or those of her parents.
  	If anyone should defend her own fault or that of another.
  	If anyone should be found to have purposely told lies.
  	If anyone should fail habitually to keep silence.
  	If someone at work or elsewhere should recount news from the world.
  	If anyone should break the fasts of the order or especially those instituted by the Church without cause or permission.
  	If anyone should take something from a Sister or from the community.
  	If anyone should change the cell or clothing that was given for her use or exchange these with another.
  	If anyone during the time for sleeping, or at another time, should enter the cell of another without permission, or without evident necessity.
  	If anyone should be found at the turn, or in the parlor, or wherever persons from outside are, without permission from the Mother Prioress.
  	If a Sister in an angry spirit should threaten the person of another.
  	If she should raise her hand or anything else so as to hurt her, the punishment for a severe fault should be doubled. Those who seek pardon for faults of this kind, or who are not accused, should be given two disciplines in chapter, fast twice on bread and water and, in the presence of the community, eat in the last place in the refectory without a table or setting for it. But for those who are accused a discipline should be added as well as a day on bread and water.
 
On the Graver Fault
 
52. It is a graver fault:
  	If anyone should be in the habit of quarreling, being rebellious, or speaking discourteously to the Mother Prioress or the presider.
  	If anyone should with malice do harm to a Sister. (And by the same fact such a one incurs excommunication and must be avoided by all.)
  	If anyone should be found sowing discord among the Sisters, or habitually gossiping about or slandering them in secret.
  	If anyone without permission from the Mother Prioress, or without a companion who, as a witness, may hear her clearly, should dare to speak with those outside the community. 

If the one accused of faults like these is convicted, she should immediately prostrate herself, piously asking for pardon, and bare her shoulders so as to receive the sentence worthy of her merits, which is a discipline, when the Mother Prioress thinks it fitting. And when told to arise, she should go to the cell designated for her by the Mother Prioress. And no one should dare approach her, or speak to her, or send her anything, so that she might thus know that she has been mistaken and is being isolated from the community and being deprived of the company of the angels. And during the time in which she is doing penance, she should not receive Communion, nor should she be assigned any office, nor should any obedience be given her, nor should she be ordered to do anything; rather she should be deprived of any office she held. Nor should she have any voice or place in chapter, except with respect to her accusation. She should take the last place until she has made full and complete satisfaction. She should not be seated with others in the refectory but sit in the middle of the refectory clothed in her mantle. And on the bare floor she should eat bread and water, unless out of compassion something be given her by the Mother Prioress. The latter should act mercifully toward her and send some Sister to her to console her. If she should show humility of heart, the whole community should support and help her in her good intentions, and the Mother Prioress should not be opposed to showing compassion, sooner or later, more or less, as the offense committed requires.
If anyone should openly rise up in rebellion against the Mother Prioress or against superiors, or should imagine or do something illicit or unbecoming against them, she should do penance as mentioned above for forty days and be deprived of her voice and place in chapter and of any office she may have held. And if through a conspiracy in this regard, or a malicious agreement, secular persons should become involved to the confusion, disgrace, and harm of the Sisters in the monastery, she should be put in the prison cell, and according to the gravity of the scandal that follows be detained. And if on account of this factions or divisions should arise in the community, both those who cause them and those who foster them equally incur excommunication and should be imprisoned.
53. If anyone, by alleging that the superiors have proceeded out of hatred or favoritism, or similar things, should seek to hinder the curbing or correcting of excesses, she should be punished with the same punishment as that mentioned above for those who conspire against the Mother Prioress.
54. And if any Sister should dare receive or give any letters, or read them, or should send anything outside or keep anything for herself that has been given her, without permission of the Mother Prioress, that Sister, through whose deeds someone in the world likewise is scandalized, in addition to the punishment mentioned in the constitutions, should at the time of the canonical hours and the prayers of thanksgiving after meals lie prostrate at the entrance to the church as the Sisters pass by.
 
On the Gravest Fault
 
55. A most grave fault is the incorrigibility of that nun who does not fear to commit faults and refuses to undergo the penance.
If anyone is an apostate or goes beyond the boundaries of the monastery and by this incurs the censure of excommunication.
And it is a most grave fault if anyone is disobedient or, through manifest rebellion, does not obey a precept given by a prelate or superior to her in particular or to all in general.
It is a most grave fault if anyone (may God forbid who is the strength of those who hope in Him) should fall into a sin of sensuality and be convicted of it (that is, seriously suspected of it).
If anyone should own property, or confess to this, and be found to have ownership at the time of death, she must not be given a Church burial.
If anyone should lay violent hands on the Mother Prioress or on any other Sister, or reveal to others in some way a crime committed by any of the Sisters or by the community, or the secrets of the community, to secular persons, or strangers, whereby the Sister in the community may suffer the loss of her good name.
If anyone by herself or through others should try to obtain some position or office or should act contrary to the constitutions of the religious order, such a Sister should be put in the prison, or fast and abstain in the place where she is, in a greater or less degree according to the quantity and quality of the offense and according to the discretion of the Mother Prioress or of the visitator of the Sisters. Any of these Sisters, under pain of rebellion, should be brought immediately to the prison cell as the Mother Prioress orders. No Sister should speak to anyone who is imprisoned but only to the guards, nor may she, under penalty of the same punishment, send such a one anything. If anyone should get out of the prison, the Sister who was in charge of her, or the one who is responsible for her getting out, if convicted, should be put in the same prison cell and punished in accordance with the offenses of the nun who was imprisoned.
56. There should be a prison cell set aside where nuns such as these may be held, and no one who is there for these scandalous reasons may be set free except by the visitator. The apostate nun should be kept indefinitely in the prison as well as she who falls into the sin of the flesh and she who commits a crime that in the world would merit the death penalty; also those who do not want to be humble or recognize their fault, unless their patience and amendment is proved during this time to such an extent that with the counsel of all those who intercede for them they may merit, with the consent of the Mother Prioress and through the visitator, to be freed from the prison. And anyone who has been in prison will know that she has lost active and passive voice and the place that goes with it. And she will be deprived of every legitimate act and every office, for although she is freed from the prison, the above mentioned are not for that reason restored, unless this favor is explicitly granted her. And even if her place is restored to her, not by that fact is her voice in chapter restored. And if active voice is given, this does not mean that she is given passive voice, unless, as was said, this is expressly given her. Nonetheless, the one who has fallen into those faults that were mentioned may not be exonerated to the point that she may be elected to any office, nor may she accompany the Sisters at the turn, or anywhere else.
If a Sister has fallen into the sin of sensuality, even though she is repentant and comes back asking for mercy and pardon, she should in no way be taken back, unless there is some intervening reasonable cause to do so, with the counsel of the visitator as to how she is to be received back.
If anyone is convicted in the presence of the prioress of having borne false witness, or should be in the habit of slander, she should do her penance in this way: at meal time, without a mantle, wearing a scapular, on which will be sewn, on the front and back, two pieces of red and white cloth in the shape of tongues, she should eat bread and water on the floor in the middle of the refectory as a sign that she is being punished in this way for the great vice of her tongue; and afterward she should be imprisoned. And if at some time she is freed from the prison, she should have no voice or place.
And if the prioress, which God forbid, should fall into some of these faults, she should be deposed at once so that she may be severely punished.
