RESPONSE TO A SPIRITUAL CHALLENGE
 
1. After reading the cartel, it seemed that our forces would be incapable of taking to the field against such valiant and strong knights, for these latter would certainly win the victory and leave us totally despoiled of our provisions and even, perhaps, intimidated so that we'd be unable to do what little we could. With this in view, no one -- Teresa of Jesus least of all -- wanted to sign the challenge. Such is the unfeigned and absolute truth.
2. We resolve to do what lies within our strength, and after spending some days in the exchange of these courtesies, it could be that, with the favor and help of those who might want to take part, we'd be able to sign the cartel within a few days.
3. We will sign under the condition that the defender not turn his back by entering those caves, but he must take to the field of this world where we are. It might happen that in seeing himself always at war where it is necessary not to lay down one's arms, or grow careless, or have a moment of safe rest, he will not be so filled with fury. For there is a great difference between the two and between speaking and acting, for we shall shortly understand the difference that lies between them.
4. Come out, come out from that pleasant life, we say to him and his companions. It may happen that they will so quickly begin stumbling and falling that it will be necessary to help them get up. For it is a terrible thing to be always in danger and loaded down with arms and without food. Well, the defender provided so amply that he quickly sends the sustenance he promises. Should he win by starving us, he would gain little honor or benefit.
5. Any knight or daughter of the Virgin who asks the Lord each day to keep Beatriz Juarez in His grace and makes the effort never to speak inadvertently and to direct all things to the Lord's glory will be given the merit she has gained in two years while caring for Sisters with very painful illnesses.
6. Sister Ana de Vergas says that if the said knights or brothers ask the Lord to remove the opposition she is undergoing and give her humility she will give them all the merit she will thereby gain if the Lord should grant it.
7. Mother Subprioress asks that those mentioned beg the Lord to take away her self-will and says that she will give them what she may have merited in two years. Her name is Isabel de la Cruz.
8. Sister Sebastiana Gómez says that to any of those mentioned who will look at the crucifix three times a day in memory of the three hours the Lord hung on the cross and thereby obtain for her the grace to conquer a strong passion which torments her, she will apply the merit she gains (if the Lord grant it) in the conquering of that passion.
9. Mother María de Tamayo will give a third part of what she suffers to any of those mentioned who recites every day an Our Father and a Hail Mary that the Lord might give her patience and conformity to His will in the endurance of her illness; this she will give each day. And her illness is very serious; for more than a year she has been unable to speak.
10. Sister Ana de la Miseria says that to any of the knights or daughters of the Virgin who should ask Jesus Christ, while considering the poverty in which He was born and died, that spiritually she might give what she promised to His Majesty she will give all the merits she might have before the Lord despite the faults she commits in His service.
11. Sister Isabel de Santángelo will give a share in what she has gained from the trials of soul she has undergone to any of the knights and daughters of the Virgin who accompanies the Lord during the three hours He remained alive on the cross and obtains from His Majesty the grace for her to keep her three vows with perfection.
12. Sister Beatriz Remón says that she will give a year of her merits to any brother or daughter of the Virgin who asks our Lady each day to grant her humility and obedience.
13. Sister María de la Cueva gives three years of her merits to any knight or daughter of the Virgin who prays to our Lady for her each day in faith and light and grace. (I know that Sister's merits are many, for she suffers great interior trials).
14. Sister María de San José says that she will give one year of her merits to anyone of those mentioned who asks of the Lord humility and obedience for her.
15. Sister Catalina Alvarez says that she gives to anyone who asks the Lord to grant her self-knowledge one year of her suffering, which is a great deal.
16. For any knight or Sister who prays to our Lady to obtain the grace from her Son so that Sister Leonor de Contreras might serve Him and persevere, this latter Sister will recite three Salves each day as long as she lives, and thus they must pray for her each day.
17. Sister Ana Sánchez says that for any knight or daughter of the Virgin who daily asks the Lord to give her His love she will recite daily three Hail Marys in honor of the purity of our Lady.
18. Sister María Gutiérrez says that she will give a part of all her merits with the Lord to any of those mentioned who pray that she be granted perseverance and perfect love of God.
19. Sister María Cimbrón says that those mentioned who pray each day for a happy death for her will have a part in all she merits through her suffering; it has been a long time since she has been able to stir from her bed, and she is close to the end.
20. Sister Inés Díaz says that for anyone of those mentioned who prays that she might share in the Blessed Virgin's feelings at the foot of the cross she will recite, each day that they do so, five Our Fathers and Hail Marys.
21. Sister Juana de Jesús says that to any of the knights and Sisters mentioned who ask the Lord each day to give her contrition for her sins she will give a share in what she merits from her many trials, which are certainly many, and the affronts she has suffered because of them.
22. Sister Ana de Torres says that to those mentioned she will give what she merits this year if they pray each day that through the torments the Lord suffered when He was nailed to the cross she might be given the grace to succeed in serving Him and to obey.
23. Sister Catalina de Velasco says that to anyone of those mentioned who asks the Lord, through the pain He suffered when He was nailed to the cross, to give her the grace not to offend Him and that our order continue to grow she will give those times that she spends with our Lady each day; they are indeed many.
24. Sister Jerónima de la Cruz says that to anyone of those mentioned who prays that she be given humility, patience, and light to serve the Lord she will recite three Creeds each day and offer a year of the trials she has suffered. This petition must be made for her each day.
25. A knight-errant says that if the Grand Master of the field obtains for him the grace he needs to serve the Lord perfectly in all that which obedience asks of him, he will give in return all the merit he gains this year in serving the Lord through obedience.
26. Sister Estefanía Samaniego says that for any knight or daughter of the Virgin who prays to our Lord that she might serve Him and not offend Him and be given living faith and meekness she will recite each day the prayer in honor of the name of Jesus and offer the merits gained from a year of illnesses and temptations that she has suffered.
27. Sister Antonia del Aguila says that to any knight or daughter of the Virgin who recalls our Lady's sorrows for a time each day and prays that she might be helped in a matter of great need for her soul and that our Mother Prioress, Teresa of Jesus, live long for the increase of our order, she will give a third part of her trials and illnesses for the rest of her life.
28. Teresa of Jesus says that to any knight of the Virgin who makes each day a very resolute act of willingness to suffer all his life from a superior who is very wicked, vicious, gluttonous, and badly disposed to him she will give, each day that he does so, half of what she merits that day both in her Communion and the many sufferings she bears; in sum, her merits in everything which will be very little. He must consider the humility with which the Lord stood before the judges and how this Lord was obedient even to the death of the cross. This contract is valid for a month and a half. 
