1. Jesus. The grace of the Holy Spirit be with your lordship. Every day I comprehend better what a favor it is from our Lord to understand the good that lies in suffering. This enables me to bear calmly the lack of satisfaction present in the things of this life, for they are of such short duration.
2. You should know that I was hurrying so that I could have a good summer in Avila or Valladolid. Then, Padre Gracián came here, who is the provincial of Andalusia through a commission given him by the nuncio after the counter-brief. ... He has such good qualities that I would be delighted if he could kiss your hands so that I could find out whether I am fooling myself. He desires very much to do so since I told him about the favor you always show toward the order. It has been a great consolation for me to see so good a man among the order's members.
3. Well, we are leaving for Seville on Monday of next week. The distance is 50 leagues. I truly believe that he would not have placed me under any obligation, but his desire for this was so great that if I hadn't complied, I would have been left with a disturbing scruple that I wasn't being obedient, something I always desire. As for me, I have felt weighed down and am not pleased with having to pass the summer in Seville with this scorching heat. Please the Lord, it will be for his service, for the rest is of little importance. I beg you to bless me and not forget to pray to our Lord for me.
4. They say they will have messengers there, for there are none in this isolated place; I will write you from there. May it please our Lord to keep you well, as I always beseech him. Padre Julián de Avila does the same. He is a real help to me. He kisses your hands many times. We keep you very much present and the house of St. Joseph and the quiet I had there. May the Lord be served by everything, and may he watch over you much more than over me. Today is the vigil of the feast of the Ascension.
Your lordship's unworthy servant and subject,
Teresa of Jesus
My health has been good here, much more than usual, glory to God.
