For Mother Prioress María Bautista.
1. Jesus be with your reverence, my daughter. It is a strange thing how almost all letters tire me except yours (excluding letters from confessors), and answering them even more so. But to receive and answer yours is refreshing. I was greatly relieved to know that your health is better. May God be blessed for everything.
2. You will have learned that my brothers arrived with the present fleet. Lorenzo de Cepeda is the one I'm fond of. And I tell you that even if he were not my brother, he would be worthy of being much loved because he is such a servant of God and so virtuous -- a very good soul. He is regaining his strength because he arrived in a very weakened state. It was God's providence that I happened to be here. I never cease rejoicing about this. For many things ... Well, I suffer it better. Teresita is eight or nine years old, very charming and beautiful.
3. He wants to remain here through this winter so as not to be separated from me. I have arranged for my sister and her husband to come to join him down here and that he stay in their house when he goes to Madrid where he will necessarily have to go. He has the means on which to live, but he's very tired of everything. His happiness would be to live in solitude. God is granting him many favors. Have the nuns pray that he will find a place to settle that is best ... I want to respond to your letter, for I tell you many have arrived that need an answer, especially from Medina.
4. That is the house that is always tormenting me, and now they are asking Asensio to be responsible for the major chapel so that Doña Elena can take responsibility for the church. But the nuns owe him so much and they so need to get out of that choir that I don't know what to say or who will have a place for them.
5. Although you are proud of your novice, I want you to know that if there is agreement about the other nun of whom you speak so highly, you couldn't fail to accept her, for what has been done is already very much. Don't be so particular. It is enough that she is helpful to the house. Making her wait could do her harm.
6. Believe me that where there is a question of benefit to many souls, certain considerations are of little value; it's enough to send her to a place where she is not known. And she shouldn't think she can find what she is looking for everywhere. In some houses there would be no nuns if so much attention were paid to details. At the beginning of a foundation and for other business matters, adaptations of some sort have to be made, as was the case with St. Joseph's in Avila and all the houses, and as also has to be done there, or you will be left without any nuns ... I tell you that if I had understood the situation in the beginning I would not have accepted her, but there was nothing else to do. Since you hadn't written me anything about it, there was no point in your disturbing the others, who knew that I had accepted her. For it was clear that I should have known whether the set number had been reached or not. Don't worry that we will not have a place for her.
7. That you think you know everything is disheartening, and you say that you are humble; and all you care about is your own little house, and you do not consider what is essential for all of them. This would create a state of unrest in which everything could come tumbling down in ruins. She was not the one I wanted to send there; I wanted to send one of Padre Olea's own relatives, and she no longer wants to go. That would be a nice state of affairs, that something be started and then left hanging because you are inflexible! No prioress has ever taken such a stance with me, nor anyone who is not prioress. I tell you that by acting in such a way you will lose my friendship.
8. You should know that I find it displeasing that you think there is no one capable of seeing things as you do; and, as I say, this comes from your being concerned about nothing but your own house, and not about what is important for many others. It is not enough for you to be free, but you must demonstrate this to others. Perhaps that nun will be holier than all. I don't know how from such a spirit you draw out so much vanity. If you were to see what is happening here as regards holding offices and selling them, and the importance given to this, you would be astonished. It is good to consider things carefully, but not with so much drive, for no one will make me believe that this arises from humility. The fault is all mine for not having found out about her from the padre himself. Since he had sent me another who was extremely good, I thought this one would be also. Nonetheless it was good to do everything that has been done because we owe him much.
9. In what concerns ... Padre Gracián ... friendship that I have, for you would be amazed at what is happening. I couldn't have done more, nor am I repentant. If you find faults in him, it will be because you have not spoken much with him and do not know him well. I tell you he is a saint and not at all impetuous, but very cautious. I already have experience of that, and one can trust in him more than in books. You say that since I have him I don't remember my Fray Domingo.They are so different from each other that I am amazed; in the former friendship the only bond is of the soul. Speaking with him is like speaking with an angel, which he is and has always been; and although the other is also, I don't know what the temptation may be -- something is very different. Blessed be God that he is better. Give him my regards.
10. Oh, what kind of life that person must be making you live who you say is worse than I, although I understand that all my fears come from the fear that you will lose your holy freedom. If I had assurance in this regard, I know that nothing, save for ingratitude, would matter to me, as is the case with the one who is there now. You should know that when I was there last I came away more assured than ever that you have nothing against me, and this did me much good, and continues to do so daily ... since this other friendship, as I say, rather gives freedom. It's something remarkably different and the submission does not come from the will but from understanding that one is doing the will of God, as I have said.
11. Why don't you tell me whether the person who approved the large book also considered the small one good. Would you mark for me any passages that should be removed, for I'm very glad they haven't burned them, and I would be very happy if the large one were preserved for when ... knowing what I know ... to benefit many souls. As for myself, what else would matter? I want the glory of my Lord and that there be many to praise him, and I certainly would want them to know my misery.
12. One of the things that make me happy to be here and willing to remain longer is that nobody has any idea of that farce about my sanctity which I was subjected to up there. This allows me to live and move about without the fear that that tower of wind is about to fall on top of me ... for a long time has passed without seeing her.
13. If something worse were to come about, I would also regret that. Give him my best regards. I tell you I have to force myself not to write to him. Have no fear that anyone will take away this friendship for it has cost too much.
14. Regarding Catalina de Jesús, Padre Gracián will have already been there, to whom I have written that he might observe her carefully. I am most consoled that it is he who will take account ...
As for the rest, I say that it is the feast of St. Augustine. I am repeating the date so that you don't have to go looking for it.
15. A candidate wants to enter who is rich and good. If she enters, we will at once look for a house. You should know that many of these sisters embroider. One who has entered does exquisite work with her hands.
Your reverence's,
Teresa of Jesus
16. Guard those notebooks carefully. In some there is good material for preparing for profession and on how to deal with temptations, if there are any. Let my Casilda read them and afterward ... Have the enclosed letter brought to Doña Guiomar, for I spend my time writing to her and the letters get lost, and then she complains, with reason. I should like to write to the subprioress, Dorotea de la Cruz, but so many letters have arrived that I am tired. In one way or another I'll see that she leaves, although I cannot be persuaded ... and the submission does not come from the will but from understanding that one is doing the will of God, as I have said.
