1. ... If she wants, you would be doing much good for the house by leaving her there; if she doesn't, let her come down here and she can go with the nuns as far as Malagón. But truthfully, I hope no one ever does me this favor. There is no house more in need of talented persons than Toledo. The prioress there will soon end her term of office, but I don't think there is another who would be better for that house. Although she is very ill, she is careful, and even though she is friendly with "the cats," she has many virtues. If you think it a good thing, she could resign, giving as a reason the hot weather of that region that is killing her, which is evident, and another election could be held. But I don't know who could go there as prioress, for almost all of them love her so much that they wouldn't adapt easily to another, in my opinion, although there will never be lacking someone who is contentious -- that's for sure.
2. You should be careful, padre mio, in this matter, and believe that I understand women's nature better than you. In no way is it fitting that you let a prioress or subject think it is possible to transfer someone from her house except in the case of making a new foundation. And truly, even for this reason I see that this expectation does so much harm. I have often desired that the time for making foundations were to end so that all the nuns could settle down. And believe me when I tell you this truth -- and if I die, don't forget it -- that for people who are enclosed, the devil doesn't want anything else except to foster the opinion that something like a transfer is possible. There is much to say about this, for I have the permission from our Father General, which I asked for, since sometimes the weather will be bad for a nun and she can then be transferred to another region. Nonetheless I have afterward seen so many disadvantages in this that unless a transfer is for the good of the order I don't think it should be allowed. It is better that some die than that all be harmed.
3. There isn't any monastery that has the full number of nuns; rather some are far short of the full number, and in Segovia I believe they are three or four short, for I paid close attention to this. In Malagón I gave the prioress I don't know how many permissions to receive different nuns, warning her to be very careful, for we took some nuns away from there and left only a few. You should revoke these permissions, for it is better that they have recourse to you. And believe me, mi padre, now that I don't feel obliged, for I know the care with which you consider things, it will be a great consolation for me to be relieved of that obligation. As things stand now we can proceed with more order, but the one who had to make foundations with nothing but air at her disposal needed help from all sides and had to be obliging.
And you should believe that they gain a great deal from being attached to the Society of Jesus -- even though some mistakes might be made in this respect -- as time will tell and I will show you. At least these Fathers have been my main help and I would never fail to recognize this. I wouldn't want you to impede the nuns in Valladolid from sending something from the garden, for they have a surplus and the others are poor. And believe me, mi padre, being gracious even in trifling matters cannot be avoided with some persons. This is the only thing that seemed to me a little rigorous in the visitations, even though -- since they were made by you -- there must have been a reason.
4. Seneca is delighted and says that he has found more in his superior than he could have desired; he is giving great thanks to God. I wouldn't want to do anything else. May His Majesty keep you for many years.
5. I tell you I am angry about those falls you have; it would be good if they tied you to the saddle so that you couldn't fall. I don't know what kind of donkey that is, nor why you have to go ten leagues in a day, which on a pack saddle is killing. I am worried about whether you have thought of putting on more clothes, for it is now getting colder. Please God the fall didn't do you any harm. Since you are fond of helping souls, consider the harm that many would suffer by your loss of health and, for love of God, take care of yourself.
6. Elías now has less fear. The rector and Rodrigo Alvarez are very hopeful that everything will work out well. As for me, all the fear I previously had has left me, for I cannot feel it even were this my desire. My health has been wretched recently. They have purged me and I am well, better than I have been in four or five months; I got to the point where I couldn't go on.
Your paternity's unworthy servant,
Teresa of Jesus
